=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. DA-10
DATE April 2, 2015
CATEGORY Disabled Access
SUBJECT Restrooms Within A Reasonable Distance
SECTIONS INVOLVED: 2013 San Francisco Building Code
- Section 11 B - 202.3 ex. 2 Technically Infeasible
- Section 11 B - 202.4 ex. 8 Path of Travel Requirements
- Section 202 - Unreasonable Hardship defined
- Section 202 -Technically Infeasible defined
- Section 11 B - 213.2 ex. 1 -Toilet Rooms and Bathing Rooms
- Chapter 29, Table 2902.1 - Minimum Plumbing Fixtures
PURPOSE It is the intent of the following interpretation and policy to establish a standard for
resolving conflicts that arise when existing restrooms can only be made
accessible by either: (1) reducing the number of fixtures provided to a number
that is less than that required in the San Francisco Building Code (SFBC)
Chapter 29, Table 2902.1; or, (2) expanding restrooms into space that is leased
or not otherwise under the control of the applicant or the building owner.
DISCUSSION The SFBC Section 11 B-204.4 requires that, in the absence of a technical
infeasibility, restrooms serving a specific area of alteration must comply with accessibility requirements.
Such compliance is often difficult to achieve because of lack of space available in existing restrooms to
create an accessible stall without removing one or more existing plumbing fixtures. This may result in a
potential conflict with other code requirements for number of plumbing fixtures. The Department's policy is
that accessibility requirements supersede fixture count requirements; however, it is the intent of the
Department to reconcile these two requirements whenever possible.
The SFBC Section 11 B-213.2 eX.1 contains an exception when determined to be technically infeasible, that
allows equivalent facilitation to be provided by an accessible single unisex restroom facility located "in the
same area and on the same floor." The SFBC Section 11 B-202.3 eX.2 contains an exception for alterations
when the Department determines that full compliance is "technically infeasible" and states that "the
alteration shall provide equivalent facilitation." Guidelines for the determination of what constitutes "in the
same area" and what may be deemed as providing "equivalent facilitation" are provided herein by the
Department.
Page 1 of 2
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street - San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 - FAX (415) 558-6401 -www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET DA-10
It is the ruling of the Department that an "Approval of Technical Infeasibility" request may be granted for
existing restrooms when one of the following conditions applies:
(1) There is no space available for expansion necessary to create the required dimensions based
upon legal constraints; such as, binding leases with adjoining tenants or physical constraints;
such as fixed structural elements, or the cost of restroom expansion constitutes a financial
hardship; or,
(2) The only reasonable option to restroom expansion is to reduce the number of fixtures below the
number required in the San Francisco Building Code based on occupant load.
Documentation of these conditions shall be provided to the Department on the "Approval of Technical
Infeasibility" and "Approval of Equivalent Facilitation" forms.
REQUIREMENTS FOR EQUIVALENT FACILITATION
The Department may grant a request for "Approval of an Equivalent Facilitation" when a single unisex toilet
room or other accessible restrooms are provided within 200 ft. of the area of remodel on the same story on
which disabled access is required; or, within one vertical story. When a restroom within this distance is
designated as an equivalent facilitation, it shall be on an accessible path of travel and it shall comply with all
accessibility requirements. Signage shall be provided at the restroom nearest the area of remodel directing
persons with disabilities to the closest fully accessible facility.
Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O. Date
Director
Department of Building Inspection
This Information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version, visit our website at
http://www.sfdbi.org
Page 2 of 2