--- Page 1 ---
City and County of San Francisco
Department of Building Inspection

London Breed, Mayor
Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O., Director

INFORMATION SHEET

NO. DA-15
DATE:
CATEGORY:

SUBJECT:

December 6, 2023
Disabled Access

Drinking Fountains and Bottle-Filling Stations

ee ne ____ EEL

PURPOSE:

REFERENCE:

BACKGROUND:

The purpose of this information sheet is to clarify the requirements for drinking
fountains and bottle-filling (drink tap) stations.

California Building Code (CBC), Current Edition

California Plumbing Code (CPC), Current Edition

San Francisco Environment Code (SFEC), Current Edition

San Francisco Plumbing Code (SFPC), Current Edition

CBC Section 11B-309 Operable parts

CBC Section 11B-211 Drinking fountains and bottle-filling stations
CBC Section 11B-602 Drinking fountains and bottle-filling stations
CPC Section 415 Drinking fountains

CPC Section 422 Minimum number of required fixtures

CPC Table 422.1 Minimum Plumbing Facilities

CPC Table 4-1 Occupant Load Factor

SFEC Chapter 23 Drink Tap Ordinance

SFPC Section 415.2.1 Drink Tap Stations

San Francisco Ordinance No. 120488

Design requirements for drinking fountains and bottle-filling stations are noted in
various codes, including the CBC, CPC, SFEC and SFPC. The purpose of this
information sheet is to provide guidance for navigating these codes, and to provide
clarification on the various requirements for drinking fountains and bottle-filling
stations.

A. CPC Table 422.1 establishes the minimum number of drinking fountains based
on occupancy and occupant load. The table notes “For requirements for persons
with disabilities Chapter 11A or 11B of the California Building Code (CBC) shall
be used.”

B. For drinking fountain requirements for buildings subject to CBC Chapter 11A, also
known as “covered buildings,” see CBC 1139A.

C. For bottle-filling station requirements, which are not mentioned in CBC Chapter
11A, refer to CBC Chapter 11B, and SFPC.

Page 1 of 2
Department of Building Inspection — Technical Services

49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 — San Francisco, CA 94103
628-652-3720 | sfdbi.org


--- Page 2 ---
INFORMATION SHEET DA-15

DISCUSSION:

1. Increased occupant load: When changes to a building result in an increased occupant load, minimum
plumbing fixtures are calculated per CPC Table 422.1. This includes new buildings, additions to
buildings, and changes of occupancy or type of construction in existing buildings. Where the increase
in occupant load noted above results in an occupant load of thirty or more, drinking fountains are required
per CPC Table 415.2.

2. First-time tenant improvements: These projects are subject to the minimum plumbing fixtures listed
in CPC Table 422.1.

3. Core and shell only: Projects in preparation of future tenant improvements, are subject to the minimum
plumbing fixtures listed in CPC Table 422.1.

4. Food establishments: CPC Section 415.2 states “Where food is consumed indoors, water stations
shall be permitted to be substituted with drinking fountains.” Break rooms shall not be considered as
food establishments.

5. Accessibility: The CPC requires drinking fountains in commercial uses to also comply with CBC
Chapter 11B, where both a low and a high spout height is required. Both spout heights are permitted to
be achieved with a single unit, satisfying a single plumbing fixture count. If the low and high spout height
drinking fountains are provided as separate units, multiple plumbing fixture counts are satisfied.

For the purposes of this information sheet, a “low” fixture refers to fixture with maximum spout height as
prescribed by CBC 11B-602.4, and a “high” fixture refers to a fixture with spout height range for standing
persons as prescribed by CBC 11B-602.7.

6. Bottle filling and drink tap stations: CPC Section 415.2 Drinking Fountain Alternatives states, “Bottle
filling stations shall be permitted to be substituted for drinking fountains up to fifty percent of
requirements for drinking fountains.” Therefore, if only one drinking fountain is required, then no
substitution is permitted. Where multiple drinking fountains are required, up to fifty percent of the
requirement is permitted to be substituted with bottle-filling stations. In addition, per SFPC Section
415.2.1 and SFEC Chapter 23 Section 2304(a), “For new construction that provides one or more drinking
fountains, the project sponsor shall provide a Drink Tap Station with each such fixture installation.”
Where drinking fountains are provided in excess of the minimum number required by the CPC, the
number of excess drinking fountains is not required to be matched by drink tap stations.

There is no distinction between the terms “drink tap station” and “bottle-filling station” when applying the
CPC, CBC and SFPC.

atrick O'Riordan, C.B.O. Date
Director
Department of Building Inspection

This Information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version, visit our

website at sfdbi.org.

Page 2 of 2

Department of Building tnspection — Technical Services
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 — San Francisco, CA 94103
628-652-3720 | sfdbi.org
