=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco London N. Breed, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-01
DATE : October 16, 2018
CATEGORY : General
SUBJECT : Signature on Plans
SECTIONS
INVOLVED : Section 106A.3.2 San Francisco Building Code (SFBC); ASCE 7-10 Section
13.1.4 Exemption 6ci; Professional Engineers Act; Architecture Practice Act;
Rules and Regulations of the Board of Registration for Professional Engineer
and the Board of Architectural Examiners; California Architects Board
Building Official’s Information Guide; California Business & Professions Code
Sections 5537, 5538, 5800 and 6757.1
INTENT OF CODE : To require the signature of an Architect or Engineer on plans when required
by State regulations.
INTERPRETATIONS : All plans, drawings, specifications, and calculations (hereafter referred to as
drawings) submitted to the Department of Building Inspection (DBI) for permit
issuance are required to be signed by the preparer and the preparer must be
a California licensed architect, land surveyor, engineer, contractor or
unlicensed designer for certain types of work as outlined herein. When such
plans are not prepared by an architect, land surveyor, or an engineer, the
Building Official may require the applicant submitting such plans or other data
to demonstrate that the State law does not require that the plans be prepared
by a licensed architect, land surveyor, or engineer. The Building Official may
require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed
by an engineer, land surveyor, or architect licensed by the State to practice as
such even if not required by State law (Section 106A.3.2 SFBC).
DISCUSSION :
(A) REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNATURE ON PLANS:
When considering the requirements for signatures on drawings, the applications for building permits
can be categorized into four (4) groups. The groups are determined by the type of work described
on the application and drawings, by the building use or occupancy, by the materials of construction,
by the span load carrying members, and by the dollar valuation as stated on the application. The
four (4) groups are as follows:
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street– San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-01
I. EXEMPT STATUS – The following types of applications are classed as exempt and any Building
Designer, Interior Designer or unlicensed person may prepare and sign the drawings:
1. Single family dwellings of wood frame construction (Type V construction) not more than 2
stories and basement in height and with spans between bearing walls not exceeding 25 feet
and the height does not exceed 25 feet; including alteration work to such buildings.
2. Multiple dwellings containing no more than 4 dwelling units of wood construction not more
than 2 stories and basement in height; including alteration work to such buildings. This shall
not be construed as allowing an unlicensed person to design multiple clusters of up to 4
dwelling units. Design per conventional design per Chapter 23 of California Building Code
(CBC).
3. Store front installations, including entrance or exit doors, not affecting the structural system of
the building and the dollar valuation of the installation do not exceed $40,000.00.
4. Fabric awnings and canopies.
5. Signs that weigh less than 250 pounds are less than 24 square feet in area and projects less
than 4 feet.
6. Tenant space improvements in non-high rise buildings contained on one floor in non-
residential occupancies where improvements do not exceed $400,000.00 in valuation
including the following:
a. Alterations involving the installation of interior wall and ceiling decorative materials.
b. Installation or relocation of interior non-load bearing partitions within the tenant space
that are not fire rated.
c. Installation of new or relocation of existing doors (non-fire rated).
d. Installation of low partitions (not exceeding 5 feet – 9 inches high) and fixtures (rails,
counters, cabinets and similar equipment attached or anchored to the building) which
do not affect the structural system or safety of the building.
e. Installation of non-fire-rated suspended ceiling systems complying with ASTM
Standard 635-04 and 636/C, 636M-06, except suspended ceiling systems used to
provide lateral support for non-bearing walls and partitions.
f. HVAC systems not part of a smoke control system in an exempt building.
7. Dwelling unit improvements contained within the space occupied by or serving an individual
dwelling unit of an R-2 or R-3 occupancies in non-exempt buildings (see Items #1 and #2) as
long as the estimated cost does not exceed $150,000.00 in value per unit and is for the
following types of work:
a. Window replacement
b. Existing kitchen and/or bathroom remodeling
c. Termite work that replaces non-structural members
d. Roof repairs of existing sheathing
e. Non-required insulation
f. Non-structural remodeling
g. Other non-structural remodeling work as long as the provisions for seismic design of
SFBC Section 3401.10 are not triggered.
8. Replacement in kind of non-structural building elements for non-exempt R-3 buildings when
Page 2 of 5

=== PAGE 3 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-01
the replacement is necessary for maintenance of the building or structure such as the
replacement of the rear stairs from a two flat building.
9. Consult the San Francisco Fire Department for requirements regarding plan submittal for the
installation or alteration of new and existing sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems.
Note: If any portion of any structure exempted by this section deviates from substantial
compliance with conventional framing requirements for wood frame construction per California
Building Code Section 2308, the Building Official shall require the preparation of plans, drawings,
specifications, or calculations for that portion by, or under the responsible control of a licensed
architect or registered engineer.
If an alteration to a non-exempt building involves any component that affects the structural system
or safety of that building, as determined by the Building Official, all plans, documents and
calculations for that alteration shall be prepared by a person licensed by the State.
Where it is required that documents be prepared by an architect or engineer, “The architect or
engineer of record shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating all submittal documents
prepared by others, included deferred submittal documents, for compatibility with the design of
the building.”(SFBC Section 106A.3.4)
II. LICENSED CONTRACTOR – Any contractor holding a valid license from the State may perform
the following:
1. Any action permitted in the Exempt Status section above.
2. A licensed contractor may provide any service permitted by Chapter 9 of the California
Business and Professions Code. Those services may include the preparation of shop and
field drawings for work which he or she has contracted or offered to perform, and designing
systems and facilities which are necessary to the completion of contracting services which he
or she has contracted or offered to perform.
3. Nothing in this section is intended to imply that a licensed contractor may design work which
is to be installed by another person.
III. REGISTERED ENGINEER OR LICENSED ARCHITECT STATUS – A Civil Engineer or Architect
licensed by the State of California shall prepare and sign all drawings for the following
applications:
1. Any new building or structure with a structural steel frame or with floors, roof or walls
constructed of concrete or masonry materials.
2. Any new building or structure having a clear span exceeding 25 feet.
3. Any new building or structure not covered by the “Exempt” or “Licensed Contractor” status
and not limited by the “Special” status below.
4. Alteration work to existing buildings described in (1), (2) and (3) above, including tenant space
improvement or dwelling unit improvements not covered by the “Exempt” or “Licensed
Contractor” status.
5. Alteration work to existing buildings which includes removal of walls without replacement, such
as open kitchen.
6. Suspended ceilings providing lateral support for walls and partitions.
Page 3 of 5

=== PAGE 4 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-01
7. Any building or structure or alteration thereto, which due to its complexity requires the
submittal of technical information beyond the capabilities of the “Exempt” or “Licensed
Contractor” status, as determined by the Building Official.
Note: Minor alterations to plans that do not alter the structural or safety components of the
building may be made on plans by a person under the direction of the design professional.
Permission for such actions should be given in the form of a letter or email addressed to the
Department.
.
IV. SPECIAL STATUS - Specialized designs for portions or components of buildings or structures
shall be prepared and signed by design professionals as required by the San Francisco Building
Code and qualified by licensing agency to prepare such drawings, such as, but not limited to:
1. Engineered grading or foundation treatment
2. Retaining walls over 4 feet total height from the bottom of footing
3. Underpinning or Shoring
4. Rigid frames, trusses and other construction of structural steel or reinforced concrete
5. Special timber construction, such as trusses, stressed skin panels, glue laminated beans,
columns and arches, etc.
6. Automatic fire sprinkler systems *
7. Smoke detection systems*
8. Alarm and communications systems *
9. Central control stations *
10. Emergency elevator operators
11. Smoke control systems*
12. Standby power systems
13. Emergency Electrical systems
14. Exit control systems
15. HVAC equipment (or other mechanical and electrical components) exceeding 400 pounds
and mounted 4’ or less above adjacent floor level (ASCE 7-10 Sec. 13.1.4 Exemption 6ci.)
(B) AFFIXING THE SIGNATURE OF AN ARCHITECT OR ENGINEER ON PLANS (OR
CONTRACTOR, IF APPLICABLE) – Where it is required that documents be prepared by an architect
or engineer (or contractor, if applicable), plans submitted for review shall be affixed with a signature
and the professional seal with registration number (or contractor license number, if applicable) in the
following manner:
1. All plans shall bear the signature and seal with registration number of the architect, land
surveyor, or engineer (or contractor license number, if applicable). The plans shall be securely
bound together and the first sheet shall have affixed an original signature. The remaining
sheets may have a signature facsimile and professional seal with registration number (or
contractor license number, if applicable). The first sheet shall have an index of all sheets.
*Consult with the San Francisco Fire Department for qualification requirements.
Page 4 of 5