=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-04
DATE : July 9, 2014
CATEGORY : General
SUBJECT : Signs
SECTIONS
INVOLVED : San Francisco Building Code - Sections 106A, 3107
San Francisco Planning Code - Section 602.7
AB-078 Criteria for Waiving Special Inspection Requirements for Awnings
and Canopies
INTENT : To clarify various procedures on sign permits
DISCUSSION :
Types and Sizes of Signs
The Planning Department regulates the types and sizes of signage in San Francisco. They may
be reached at (415) 558-6377 or at the website http://www.sf-planning.org/.
Obtaining Permits
To obtain permits to install or erect signs, the applicant shall complete Form 4/7, including the
total job cost and submit two sets of plans (minimum size 11”x17”). All plans shall be signed by
the person preparing the plans. Form 4/7 shall be used for all signs including but not limited to
signs attached to structures, monument signs and post mounted signs, except where noted
elsewhere in this information sheet.
The plans shall indicate the aggregate signage area and shall include a plot plan, proposed front
and side building elevations on scaled drawings, the exact location of the sign(s) horizontally and
vertically on the building and on the lot, unless painted or other non-structural sign. Sidewalk
width and sign construction shall be shown as required. As per San Francisco Building Code
Section 11B-202.4 exception 6, there is no requirement for path of travel upgrades or DA checklist
associated with the addition or replacement of signs.
Illumination details for sign, marquee etc., and structural details shall also be shown including
method of attachment and the construction of the sign. Provide height of sign above ground and
the projection in feet from the building.
Page 1 of 3
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-04
To obtain an application for permit to remove a sign, applicant will need to fill out Bldg. Form No.
3/8.
For new buildings, the applicant shall complete Form 3/8, alteration permit and submit 2 copies of a
(CMSP) Comprehensive Master Sign Plan.
If wall sign, provide two sets of sign copy on minimum size 11”X17” paper.
Procedures on Sign Permits
1. Identical signs may be filed with one sign permit application (maximum 5 signs per permit).
2. Different signs (size or type) need to be on different sign permit application.
3. Multiple sign permits may be filed with two identical sets of plans. The multiple signs shall be
clearly identified within the plan set to show the following:
a. number of signs
b. size
c. each type
d. locations
e. installation details
4. Except for advertising sign, removal of any sign, including Business Sign, shall require a
letter from owner of premises as per SFBC Section 3107.7 with a completed Form 3/8.
(A Business Sign, as defined in SFBC Section 3107.2, is a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on
the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.)
5. Removal of advertising sign does not need a letter from owner of premises. A completed
Form 3/8 is required.
(General Advertising Sign, as defined in Planning Code Section 602.7, is a sign which directs
attention to a business, commodity, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or
conducted elsewhere than on the premises upon which sign is located, or to which it is
affixed, and which is sold, offered or conducted on such premises only incidentally, if at all.)
Note: Contact the City Planning Department for information and procedures on General
Advertising Signs and Business Signs, including notification requirements to the owner of the
property on which the sign is located.
6. A separate Electrical Permit shall be required for any sign electrically powered.
Sign as Part of Work in Permit Application Form 3/8 or Addendum
To document the sign which is part of work if included in an issued Permit Application Form 3/8 or
an issued addendum, applicant needs to complete Form 4/7 and includes one set of the approved
plans for reference.
Page 2 of 3