--- Page 1 ---
City and County of San Francisco

Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection

Tom C, Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director

INFORMATION SHEET

NO. G-09

DATE : June 14, 2016

CATEGORY :_ General

SUBJECT : Unsafe Buildings, Structure or Property or Public Nuisance Abatement

Procedure
a a a a I a a Se

PURPOSE : The purpose of this Information Sheet is to revise the abatement procedure for notice
of violations of unsafe buildings, structures, property, or public nuisance per
Ordinance No. 60-16 enacted May 27, 2016.

REFERENCE :_ SanFrancisco Building Code
San Francisco Housing Code
San Francisco Electrical Code
San Francisco Plumbing Code
Ordinance No. 60-16

CODE SECTIONS
(A). San Francisco Building Code

Section 102A - UNSAFE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR PROPERTY

All buildings, structures, property, or parts thereof, regulated by this code that are structurally unsafe
or not provided with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to
human life, safety or health of the occupants or the occupants of adjacent properties or the public by
reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, or by reason of
occupancy or use in violation of law or ordinance, or were erected, moved, altered, constructed or
maintained in violation of law or ordinance are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe. Whenever
the Building Official determines by inspection that property or properties either improved or
unimproved are unstable because of landslide, subsidence or inundation or that such occurrences
are deemed imminent as described above, the Building Official shall give written notice to the owner
or owners that said property or properties are unsafe. The notice shall specify the conditions
creating the unsafe classification. All such unsafe buildings, structures, property, or portions thereof,
are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be vacated, repaired, altered or demolished as
hereinafter provided.

R*K*

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street — San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org


--- Page 2 ---
Information Sheet G-09

102A.3 Inspections.

The Building Official may inspect or cause the inspection of any building, structure or property for
the purpose of determining whether it is unsafe whenever:

(a) The Building Official with reasonable discretion, determines that such inspection is
necessary or desirable, or,

(b) Any person or any agency or department of the City submits to the Building Official a
complaint which, in the Building Official’s opinion, establishes reasonable cause to believe that the
building, structure or property or any portion thereof is unsafe.

102A.4 Notice of Municipal Code Violation.

(a) When the Building Official observes or otherwise determines any condition which renders
the building, structure or property unsafe, the Building Official shall, within 15 days, serve a Notice of
Municipal Code Violation ("NOV") upon the building owner. The Building Official shall not issue
successive NO Vs for the same violation or violations as a means of extending the filing time or the
enforcement process or as a means of following up with the building owner.

(b) The NOV shall identify; each violation observed or otherwise established, including the
violations which render the building, structure or property unsafe, and shall state a deadline for the
building owner to abate the violations and a date of reinspection. The NOV shall also set forth the
penalties, fees and costs as prescribed in Sections 102A. 7(d) and 103A of this code. The NOV shall
be a public record subject to disclosure pursuant to Administrative Code Chapter 67.

(c) The Building Official shall mail a copy of the NOV to the building owner by first class mail at
the address listed with the Assessor-Recorder's Office. The Building Official shall post the NOV in a
conspicuous place on the subject property and make a copy of the NOV available to each tenant of
the subject property.

102A.5 Notice of Administrative Hearing
(a) If the Building Official determines that the building owner has not corrected the code
violations by the deadline provided in the NOV, the Building Official shall schedule an administrative
hearing on the violations, to be heard within 60 days of the deadline, unless the building owner
demonstrates to the Building Official’s satisfaction that the building owner has made substantial
progress in abating the violations.
(b) The Building Official shall issue a Notice of Administrative Hearing ("Hearing Notice") to the
building owner. The Hearing Notice shall state the date, hour and place of the hearing and contain a
conspicuous warning setting forth the penalties, fees and costs prescribed in Sections 102A. 7(d)
and 103A of this Code. The Hearing Notice shall include a copy of the NOV. The Hearing Notice
shall inform all interested parties who desire to be heard in the matter that they may appear to show
cause why the property, building or structure, or portion thereof: should not be ordered repaired,
altered, vacated and repaired or altered, or vacated and demolished.
(c) The Building Official shall serve the Hearing Notice on the building owner by certified mail
to the building owner at the address listed with the Assessor-Recorder's Office and shall post the
NOV in a conspicuous place on the subject property. The Building Official shall mail the Hearing
Notice on the building owner at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
(d) In addition to serving the NOV on the building owner, the Building Official shall send a copy
of the NOV by certified mail to:

(1) The person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved;

(2) The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust, lien or encumbrance of record;

(3) The owner or holder of any lease of record; and,

(4) The record holder of any other estate or interest in the building, structure or property, or the
land upon which it is located.
The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the
validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.

Page 2 of 7


--- Page 3 ---
Information Sheet G-09

(e) The person serving the Hearing Notice shall complete a declaration under penalty of
perjury, certifying the date and manner in which such Hearing Notice was given, and the Building
Official shall retain the certified mail receipt card, if any, for the Hearing Notice.

(f) In addition to the Hearing Notice, the Building Official shall provide the building owner with
an information sheet regarding the enforcement process, the building owner's rights and duties prior
to the hearing, and the information the building owner must bring to the hearing.

102A.6 Conduct of Administrative Hearing.

(a) The Building Official shall conduct the Administrative Hearing, or may designate a Hearing
Officer who shall have the same authority as the Building Official to hear and decide the case and to
make any orders consistent with this Code. For purposes of Sections 102A. 6 through 102A. 7.
"Hearing Officer" shall include the Building Official if the Building Official conducts the Administrative
Hearing. The Hearing Officer shall not be the same individual who signed the NOV.

(b) The Hearing Officer shall hold the Administrative Hearing at the time and place designated
in the Hearing Notice. The Hearing Officer may, in his or her discretion and for good cause shown,
continue the hearing one time, for a period not to exceed 30 days. All persons having an interest in
the building, structure or property or having knowledge of facts material to the allegations of the
NOV, including the list of code violations, may present evidence for consideration by the Hearing
Officer, subject to any rules adopted by the Hearing Officer for the orderly conduct of the hearing.

102A. 7 Administrative Order.

(a) Within 30 days following the conclusion of the Administrative Hearing, the Hearing Officer
shall issue a written decision ("Administrative Order").
(b) The Administrative Order shall state in reasonable detail which conditions render the

building, structure, or property, or portion thereof: unsafe and shall state the work required to be
done to satisfy the Administrative Order. The Administrative Order shall include a copy of the NOV.
The Administrative Order may direct the building owner to repair, alter, vacate, and/or demolish the
subject property.

(c) The Administrative Order shall specify the time within which the building owner shall repair,
alter, vacate, and/or demolish the building, structure, or property, or portion thereof: or otherwise
comply with the Order. The time for compliance with the Administrative Order shall not to exceed
180 days from permit issuance. The Hearing Officer may, in his or her discretion and for good cause
shown, extend the time for compliance with the Administrative Order once, for a period limited to the
minimum time necessary for completion and not to exceed 90 days, following a written request by
the building owner.

(d) In addition to any monetary penalties authorized in Section 103A, the Department shall be
entitled to its costs of preparation for and appearance at the Administrative Hearing, and all prior
and subsequent attendant and administrative costs, and the Department shall assess these costs
upon the building owner monthly, at the rates set under Section 110A, Tables 1A-D (Standard
Hourly Rates) and 1A-K (Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments), until the costs are
paid in full. In addition, the Department shall be entitled to its attorneys fees and costs, including but
not limited to expert witness fees, incurred in bring the administrative enforcement action. The
violations cited in the Administrative Order will not be deemed legally abated until the building owner
makes full payment of the penalties and costs, and failure to pay the assessment of costs shall
result in tax lien proceedings against the property.

(e) The Hearing Officer shall serve the Administrative Order on the building owner in the same
manner as the Hearing Notice. The Building Official shall record a copy of the Administrative Order
in the Assessor-Recorder's Office. When the Building Official determines that the work required
under the Administrative Order has been completed and the building, structure, or property, or
portion thereof: no longer is unsafe, the Building Official shall issue and record a rescission of the
Administrative Order with the Assessor-Recorder's Office.

Page 3 of 7


--- Page 4 ---
Information Sheet G-09

(f) Any person may appeal an Administrative Order pursuant to Section 105A.2. The Hearing
Officer shall inform the building owner, at the Administrative Hearing and in the Administrative
Order, of the right of appeal to the Abatement Appeals Board provided that the appeal is made in
writing and filed with the Secretary of the Abatement Appeals Board within 15 days after the Order is
posted and served. The 15-day limitation shall not apply when any type of a moratorium authorized
in Section 105A.2 is sought. Where construction materials, methods, types of construction, or
compliance with the time limits set forth in Table No. | 6B-A are the bases, in whole or in part, of the
Building Official's finding that an unreinforced masonry building, or portion thereof: is unsafe, the
Abatement Appeals Board shall refer these matters to the Board of Examiners established in
Section 105A.1 of this Code. Where construction materials, methods, and types of construction are
the bases, in whole or in part, of the Building Official’s finding that the building. or structure, or
portion thereof: is unsafe, the Abatement Appeals Board shall refer these matters to the Board of
Examiners for its examination and determination with respect to such materials, methods, and types
of construction. The Board of Examiners shall approve or disapprove such materials, methods, and
types of construction, and may attach conditions to its approval, and shall forward a copy of its
report to the Abatement Appeals Board. The Abatement Appeals Board shall include in its decision
the findings of the Board of Examiners.

102A.8 Remedies are Non-Exclusive

Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 102A. 4 through 102A. 7, the City Attorney may institute
civil proceedings (or injunctive and monetary relief: including civil penalties, against a building owner
(or violations of the Municipal Code under any circumstances, without regard to whether a complaint
has been filed or the Building Official has issued a NOV or an Administrative Order. In any civil
action filed by the City Attorney under this Section 102.A.8, the City Attorney may seek recovery of
and the court may award the City its attorneys fees and costs, including but not limited to expert
witness fees, incurred in bringing the proceedings.

(B). San Francisco Housing Code

Section 201. GENERAL.
(e) Abatement. For abatement procedures, see Chapter 1A of the Building Code, including, but not
limited to. Sections 102A.3 through 1024.8.

Section 1001. GENERAL.

(a) Any residential building or portion thereof, as defined by California Health and

16 Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, State Housing Law, Sections 17920.3 et seq., including any
dwelling units, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which
there exists any of the conditions enumerated in this chapter to an extent that endangers the life, limb,
health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby
is declared to be a substandard building. Any building or portion thereof: determined to be a substandard
building under this Section 1001 is also declared to be a nuisance as provided in Section 401.

(C.) San Francisco Electrical Code

Section 89.126 Unsafe Buildings or Structures.

(C) Change in occupancy without complying with the provision of Section 89.118 of

12 this code. Such unsafe building, structure, property or portion shall be vacated, repaired, altered or
demolished, and violations of this Code abated, in accordance with Section 102A of the Building Code,
including, but not limited to, Sections 102A. 3 through 102A. 8.

Page 4 of 7


--- Page 5 ---
Information Sheet G-09

(D). San Francisco Plumbing Code
Section 104.0 Abatement of Public Nuisance. In order to abate a nuisance as defined in
Section 216.0 of this code, the inspection and abatement procedures as set forth in Section 1102A of
the Building Code. Including, but not limited to. Sections 102A. 3 through 102A. 8, shall apply.
DISCUSSION:

Department of Building Inspection Unsafe Buildings, Structure or Property or Public Nuisance
Abatement Procedure:

1. Receive complaints.
2. Inspect.

3. Serve a Notice of Municipal Code Violation (NOV) (see Attachment A) to the owner by first class
mail if the property is determined unsafe.

4. Post the NOV on the property.
5. NOV shall include:
a. Violations
b. Deadline
c. Date for reinspection
d. Penalties, fees and costs
6. Any action plan from the owner needs to be approved by a DBI senior inspector.
7. DBI may send a courtesy reminder (see Attachment B) to the owner.
8. No successive NOVs.

9. Schedule an administrative hearing within 60 days of the deadline if the owner has not corrected
the violation by the deadline.

10. Issue a Notice of Administrative Hearing and the Information Sheet (see Attachment C) to the
owner by certified mail at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.

11. Conduct the Administrative Hearing.
12. Issue a written decision (“Administrative Order”)
13. Serve the Administrative Order to the owner by certified mail.

14. Record a copy of the Administrative Order in the Assessor-Recorder’s Office.

Page 5 of 7

|


--- Page 6 ---
Information Sheet G-09

OTHER CONDITIONS:

Other conditions will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Supervisor or Manager.

Ce hh O/) 3/16

Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., ow’ Date
Director
Department of Building Inspection

Attachment A: Notice of Violations Warnings

Attachment B: Notice of Violation Final Warning

Attachment C: Director's Hearing Information Sheet

Attachment D: Ordinance 60-16 webpage link:
http://www.sfbos.org/ftp/uploadedfiles/bdsupvrs/ordinances16/00060-16.pdf.

Attachment E: Table of San Francisco Building Code, Housing Code, Electrical Code and Plumbing Code
Comparison after Ordinance 60-16 Implementation

This Information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version, visit our

website at http://www.sfdbi.org

Page 6 of 7


--- Page 7 ---
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION

Inspection Services

City and County of San Francisco

1660 Mission Street, 3 Floor, San Francisco, California 94103-2414
(415) 558-6570

Website: www.sfdbi.org

ATTACHMENT A

NOTICE OF VIOLATION WARNINGS!

TO THE PROPERTY OWNER(S), THEIR SUCCESSORS, AND ALL OTHER PERSONS HAVING
ANY INTEREST IN THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PROPERTY LOCATED IN THE CITY AND
COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO PLEASE TAKE NOTICE:

COMPLIANCE WITHIN SPECIFIED TIME FRAME REQUIRED: The described
premises were inspected by inspector(s) of the Department of Building Inspection. As a result of
the inspection(s), violations were found to exist and were listed in the Notice of Violation mailed to
the property owner(s). ACCORDINGLY, the owner(s) of the above described property are
required, within the time frame set forth in this Notice to make application (if required) for the
necessary permits, to correct the conditions diligently and expeditiously, and to complete
the work within the specified time on the attached NOTICE(S), to be verified by the
appropriate Inspector through site inspection.

COST OF CODE ENFORCEMENT WILL BE BORNE BY THE PROPERTY
OWNER: Section 102A.3 of the San Francisco Building Code provides that in addition to the civil
penalties described therein, the property owner shall be assessed all administrative, and
inspection’s costs incurred by the Department of Building Inspection for the property owners failure
to comply with this Notice. These costs arise from department time accrued pertaining but not
limited to: (1) monthly violation monitoring, (2) case inquiries (phone calls, counter visits, response
to correspondence, etc.), (3) case management, (4) permit history research, (5) notice/hearing
preparation, (6) inspections, (7) staff appearances/reports at hearings, and (8) case referrals.
Assessment of Costs will accrue when the property owner fails to comply with this Notice
through: (1) a monthly violation monitoring fee, and (2) an administrative hourly rate for case
management, and an hourly rate for inspections, as provided for in Sections 102A.3,
102A.17, and Section 110A, Tables IA-D, and IA-K of the San Francisco Building Code. The
property owner will be notified by letter of the accrued Assessment of Costs following failure to
comply with this Notice. Failure to pay the Assessment of Costs shall result in: (1) the case not
being legally abated until all assessments are paid, and (2) tax lien proceedings against the
property owner pursuant to Sections 102A.3, 102A.16, 102A.17, 102A.18 et seq., and 102A.20 of
the San Francisco Building Code.

Page 1 of 2


--- Page 8 ---
NOTICE OF VIOLATION WARNINGS!
(Continued from page 1)

PUBLIC NUISANCES & MISDEMEANORS: Section 103A of the San Francisco Building
Code provides that any person, the owner’s authorized agent who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists or opposes the execution of any provisions of this
code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.

PERMIT REQUIREMENTS: Any required permit application must be applied for within the
time limit set forth in the attached Notice(s). Permit applications are to be filed with the requisite
plans, drawings, and specifications at the Central Permit Bureau, Department of Building Inspection,
at 1660 Mission Street, 1S Floor. Pursuant to Sections 107A.5, and 110A, Table 1A-K of the San
Francisco Building Code, investigation fees are charged for work begun or performed without
permits or for work exceeding the scope of permits. Such fees may be appealed to the Board of
Permit Appeals within 15 days of permit issuance at 1650 Mission Street, 3 Floor, Suite 304
at (415) 575-6880.

NOTIFICATION TO BUILDING TENANTS: Pursuant to Sections 17980.1 and 17980.6 of
the California Health & Safety Code, and Section 102A.3 of the San Francisco Building Code, when
issuing a Notice of Violation, the local jurisdiction shall post a copy of the Notice in a conspicuous
place on the property.

PROPERTY OWNER/LESSOR MAY NOT RETALIATE AGAINST

TENANT/LESSEE FOR MAKING A COMPLAINT: Pursuant to Section 17980.6 of the

California Health & Safety Code, the property owner may not retaliate against the tenant/lessee for
exercising rights under Section 1942.5 of the California Civil Code.

REINSPECTION FEES: For every inspection, after the initial re-inspection, an hourly fee will
be charged until the violations are abated pursuant to Sections 108A.8 and 110A, Table IA-G of the
San Francisco Building Code.

VIOLATIONS OF WORK PRACTICES FOR LEAD-BASED PAINT DISTURBANCE:
Section 327 of the San Francisco Existing Building Code regulates work that disturbs or removes
lead paint. Failure to comply with these requirements may result in a penalty not to exceed $500 per
day plus administrative costs as provided by Section 327.8 of this Code.

Upon completion of all required work, you must contact the designated Inspector for a final
inspection, unless otherwise specified. Please contact the specific Inspection Division if you
have any questions. If you want more information on the overall code enforcement process,
you may request a copy of the Department brochure entitled What You Should Know about
the Department of Building Inspection Code Enforcement Process or download the
document from the Department website.

Page 2 of 2


--- Page 9 ---
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION

Inspection Services

City and County of San Francisco

1660 Mission Street, 3% Floor, San Francisco, California 94103-2414
(415) 558-6570

Website: www.sfdbi.org

ATTACHMENT B

PROPERTY OWNER DATE:

PROPERTY ADDRESS:

BLOCK/LOT:

Building Complaint #:

(Electrical

Plumbing)

NOTICE OF VIOLATION FINAL WARNING

Dear Property Owner(s):
NOTICE OF VIOLATION OUTSTANDING:
On __ your property was inspected and a Notice of Violation was issued

informing you of required code abatement, and warnings for failure comply. The time period to correct
all cited code violations indicated in this Notice has passed, and the Department records indicate that
the required code abatement work remains outstanding. Your case has been referred to the Code
Enforcement Division for enforcement.

ASSESSMENT OF COSTS NOW IMPOSED:

Therefore, pursuant to Section 102A.3 of the San Francisco Building Code, you will be assessed costs
arising from Department time accrued pertaining, but not limited to: (1) site inspections and
reinspections, (2) case management, update, and data entry, (3) case inquiries (meetings, office visits,
phone calls, emails, response to correspondence, etc.), (4) permit history research, (5) notice/hearing
preparation, (6) staff appearances/reports at hearings, (7) case referrals, and (8) monthly violation
monitoring

AVOID FURTHER ASSESSEMENT:

To keep the assessment of costs at a minimum, and avoid the accrual of further time spent on the
actions above such as administrative hearing preparation, and monthly violation monitoring, etc., please
complete all work within thirty (30) days. Contact the Code Enforcement Division at (415)558-6454 if you
have questions concerning the referenced Notice of Violation

IF PERMITS ARE REQUIRED:

Please note that you must also obtain all necessary building, plumbing, and/or electrical permits and
obtain final sign-off from the Building, Plumbing, and/or Electrical Inspector(s) assigned the job card
for your issued permit(s) before the required work will be considered completed.

CASE WILL BE CLOSED WHEN ALL WORK AND ASSESSMENT OF COSTS PAID:

This case will not be closed and assessment of costs will continue to accrue until: (1) all required
repairs are completed as verified by site inspection, (2) final sign-offs are obtained for all required
permits, and (3) all assessment of costs are paid by cashiers check or money order.

YOUR PROMPT ACTION IS REQUESTED & APPRECIATED!


--- Page 10 ---
DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION

Code Enforcement Section

City and County of San Francisco

1660 Mission Street, 6 Floor, San Francisco, California 94103-2414
(415) 558-6454 Email: dbi.ced@sfgov.org

Website: www.sfdbi.org/dbi

ATTACHMENT C

DIRECTOR’S HEARING INFORMATION SHEET

You have been scheduled for a Director’s Hearing because the Department records indicate
that outstanding code violations remain as cited on the attached Notice(s) of Violation (or that
corrected items have not been verified by the assigned Inspector through a site inspection).
This Information Sheet will give you guidance on how to prepare for this hearing.

STEP ONE: Attend the Hearing at the scheduled date, time and location specified. If
you cannot attend the hearing, you may send a knowledgeable representative
that will provide information outlined below.

STEP TWO: Review the attached Notice(s) of Violation. Ensure that you have complied
with all violations listed in the manner indicated, and provide information on
these items per the guidelines below.

STEP THREE: Bring to the hearing all the information related to your violations per the
following guidelines.

IF ALL THE VIOLATIONS HAVE NOW BEEN CORRECTED:
e Secure a final inspection with the appropriate Housing, Building, Plumbing, or Electrical
Inspector/s prior to the scheduled Hearing.
e Bring signed/completed job cards for all work requiring building, plumbing, or electrical
permits. The Notice of Violation will have instructions regarding the necessary inspections.

IF ALL, OR A PORTION OF THE VIOLATIONS REMAIN OUTSTANDING, BRING:

e All applications and plans for submitted permit applications, and job cards for issued permits

e All inspection activity information for requisite issued permits

e Notices requesting entry you served upon the residential occupant(s) necessary to perform
repairs to abate the code violations

e Proof of registration/ insurance/ maintenance/ security provisions of Vacant Building
Ordinance.

e Information that you have secured all necessary inspections including final inspection to
document work completion.

e An action plan addressing all outstanding violations.


--- Page 11 ---
BUILDING OWNER’S RIGHTS & DUTIES

SUMMARY OF DIRECTOR’S HEARING FORMAT AND RELATED PROCEDURES

The cases will be called and reviewed by the Hearing Officer in the Order they appear on the
Agenda which is posted outside the hearing room. Therefore, it is important to arrive at the time
specified on the Notice of Director's Hearing.

The Hearing Officer will take the Department staff presentation first, and then ask for testimony
from the property owner/representative, building occupants, and the public. After being sworn in,
you will have an opportunity to present your evidence and ask questions.

The property owner may request a one-time 30-day continuance from the Hearing Officer for
good cause. These requests should be submitted to the Hearing Officer in writing, preferably in
advance of the hearing, and explain the reasons for the continuance. The Hearing Officer will
determine whether to grant this request

The possible Hearing Officer actions include, but not limited to:
o Issuing an Order of Abatement that would be recorded on your property record.
o Taking the case under advisement for not more than 30 days, and issuing an Order of
Abatement if all the outstanding violations are not resolved within the advisement period.
o Referring the case back to staff for good cause.
o Issuing a one-time continuance for good cause not to exceed 30 days.
o Dismissing the proceedings for good cause.

If an Order of Abatement is issued by the Hearing Officer, the property owner can appeal this
decision to the Abatement Appeals Board within 15 days of the posting of the Order at the
subject property, or when the Order is placed in the USPS mail, whichever date is later. This
information will also be provided on the Order of Abatement.

The property owner must give adequate notice to enter any occupied residential area for the
purposes of abating violations cited in the attached Notice(s) pursuant to California Civil Code
Section 1954 as referenced in Section 303(b) of the San Francisco Housing Code.

All time frames indicated in this Information Sheet are in calendar days unless otherwise
specified.

Code Enforcement Cases that have outstanding code violations after the compliance date
specified on the Notice(s) of Violation are subject to Assessment of Costs pursuant to Section
102A.3 of the San Francisco Building Code.

If you have any questions about this process, please contact the Code Enforcement Services at
(415) 558-6454.


--- Page 12 ---
Information Sheet G-09

ATTACHMENT E
Table of San Francisco Building Code, Housing Code, Electrical Code and Plumbing Code
Comparison after Ordinance 60-16 Implementation

San Francisco Electrical
Building Code Housing Code Code Plumbing Code
(SFBC)
Inspection 1. Routine
(Section 102A.3) | 1. Determined by /Complaint
Building Official or Inspection by City | Same as
2. Any one or any 2. Same as SFBC SFBC Section same as vrs
agency/department Section 102A.3 102A.3 ;
submits a complain | 3. SFHC 302(b)(c)

SFHC 303(a)

Notice of e Served within 15
Municipal Code days after Building

Violation (NOV) Official’s
(Section 102A.4) determination Same as SFBC Same as _| same as SFBC
e No successive NOV eenay Wert SF Be Samten Section 102A.4
SFHC 201 (a) 102A.4
for the same
violation or
violations
date for S SFBC sora 5 SFBC
ate for . ame as ; ame as
reinspection Siated in BEY Section 102A.4 ry rial Section 102A.4
(Section 102A.4) ;
Penalties, Fees 1. SFBC Tables 1A-D 1. Criminal Penalty

and Costs

(Section 102A.4)
Notice of Hearing
(Section 102A.5)

and 1A-K SFHC 204 Civil Penalty
2. SFBCSection 103A | 2. Civil Penalty

Within 60 days of the | Same as SFBC
deadline Section 102A.5

Civil Penalty

Same as
SFBC Section
102A.5

Same as SFBC
Section 102A.5

Conduct of Hearing Officer shall Same as

Hearing not be the same Same as SFBC SFBC Section Same as SFBC

(Section 102A.6) | individual who signed | Section 102A.6 1004.6 Section 102A.6
the NOV ;

Administration
Order (decision) | within 30 days
(Section 102A.7) | following the hearing

Same as
Same as SFBC SFBC Section Same as SFBC

Section 102A.7 102A.7 Section 102A.7

Non-Exclusive City Attorney may

Remedies institute civil Same as
(Section 102A.8) | proceedings for the Same as SFBC SFBC Section Same as SFBC
. f Section 102A.8 Section 102A.8
violations under any 102A.8

circumstances

