--- Page 1 ---
rity and County of San Francisco
lepartment of Building Inspection

Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.0., Director

INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-15
DATE April 1, 2014 (Revised)
CATEGORY _ 1 General
SUBJECT : Documenting Removal or Loss of Dwelling Units Checklist for

R-2 Buildings

TE es!)

PURPOSE : To establish permit application procedures connected to the Mayor's Executive

Directive 13-01, Housing Production & Preservation of Rental Stock when a permit
application is filed to remove existing dwelling units in buildings with 3 or more legal
units (R-2 occupancy group). Information Sheet G-15 does not apply to buildings
with 1 and 2 legal dwelling units (R-3).

REFERENCE : 2013 San Francisco Building Code Chapter 1A

INTENT

To prevent Over-the-Counter review and issuance of permit applications that would
remove dwelling units, that would displace existing tenants and to take in the permit
application for Planning Department review.

DISCUSSION
1. Conditions for submitting a permit application to remove dwelling units may be the following:
a. Owner is responding to a complaint that the building has illegal dwelling units and exceeds the legal
dwelling unit count of the building.
b. Owner is responding to a Notice of Violation that the building has illegal dwelling units.
c. Owner desires to reduce the legal dwelling unit count by merging legal dwelling units.
d. New building owner wishes to restore the building to the legal dwelling unit count after purchase.
e. Owner wishes to expand existing dwelling unit space into an illegal dwelling unit space.

N

The permit application form submitted shall be BLDG FORM 3, APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT

ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIR, and under description of work, one of the following statements -
shall be the first. sentence to categorize the intent of the permit application:

o2979

To remove illegal dwelling unit in response to Complaint (CMP) #

To remove illegal dwelling unit in response to Notice of Violation (NOV) #

To merge _(#)__ legal dwelling unit(s) into one dwelling and reduce the total dwelling unit count.
To remove illegal dwelling unit(s) and restore building to legal dwelling unit count.

To remove illegal dwelling unit and expand a legal dwelling unit into its space.

Page 1 of 2

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street — San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org



--- Page 2 ---
INFORMATION SHEET G-15

3. Permit application submittal and routing:

a. 1 floor DBI Public Information
i. reviews the scope of work and determines that the application’s description is for a building with
three (3) or more legal units and describes the removal or merging of dwelling units of illegal,
legal or unknown status
ii. ensures that the scope of work’s first sentence states the removal or merging of dwelling units
and ensures that the applicant has 2 sets plans, minimum size 11” x 17”
iii. refers applicant to 1* floor CPB

b. 5" floor Initial Plan Review (IPR)
i. determines that the removal or merging of dwelling units is the scope of work
ii. provides the applicant with the DOCUMENTING REMOVAL OR LOSS OF
DWELLING UNITS. form to complete
iil. conducts the initial screening of application and plans for completeness and compliance with
San Francisco Building Code plan information standards
iv. assigns Permit Application # and posts as FORM 3 on the Permit Tracking System (PTS)
v. checks off the REMOVE/MERGE DWELLING UNITS box under the PTS CHARACTERISTICS
screen
vi. completes the routing slip and refers applicant to Planning Department for completeness
review and to document acceptance by Planning on the routing slip
vii. refers the applicant to submit documents to the 1* floor CPB after acceptance by the Planning
Department

c. 1% floor Central Permit Bureau (CPB)

i. processes the permit application and plans for in-take

ii. assists the applicant and ensures that the DOCUMENTING REMOVAL OR LOSS OF
DWELLING UNITS form has been completed entirely

iii. | checks off and/or verifies REMOVE/MERGE DWELLING UNITS box under the PTS
CHARACTERISTICS screen

iv. completes the routing slip and refers applicant to Planning Department for completeness
review and to document acceptance by Planning on the routing slip

v. routes the permit application and plans to the Planning Department

Loon. Ces A/t/r0/4

Tom C. Hui, $.E., C.B.0O. Date
Director
Department of Building Inspection

Attachments:
e DOCUMENTING REMOVAL OR LOSS OF DWELLING UNITS form

This Information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version, visit our

website at http:/Avwww.sfdbi.org

Page 2 of 2


--- Page 3 ---
City and County of San Francisco
Department of Building Inspection

Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director

DOCUMENTING REMOVAL OR LOSS OF DWELLING UNITS

DATE SUBMITTED

1.

PURPOSE: This is a dwelling unit removal checklist for building permit applications connected to
buildings with 3 or more legal dwelling units (R-2 occupancy). Should any of the following occur in the
building, the permit may not be reviewed over-the-counter and shall be referred to the Planning
Department to be processed as a mandatory Discretionary Review (DR):

a. The work will result in the removal or loss of a dwelling unit: legal, illegal or of unknown status,
b, . The work will result in the permanent displacement of any tenant from their dwelling unit: legal,
illegal or of unknown status.

2. Complaint/Notice of Violation # (connected to illegal dwelling unit)
3. Permit Application #
4. Property Address:
5. Block/Lot: / Occupancy Group: _- Construction type: Stories:
6. - Sprinkler (check one): Full system No sprinklers Partial system
7. Total number of existing dwelling Units (DU):
a. Number of lega! DU: ob. Number of illegal DU:
8. Number of DU proposed to be removed: Legal _ Illegal
Will any of the removed units displace existing tenant(s): Yes No
a. If yes, number of tenants that will be displaced:
10. Are any of the illegal DU occupied: Yes No
a. If yes, which illegal units are occupied:
b. # # # # # #
| hereby declare that the information provided is accurate to the best of my knowledge.
Print name: Titie:
Address:
Phone:

Signature: Date:

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street — San Francisco CA 94103

Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org
Revised: 04/01/2014
