=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-17
DATE : August 12, 2016
CATEGORY : General
SUBJECT : Legalization of Dwelling Units Installed Without a Permit
REFERENCE : San Francisco Building Code
Administrative Bulletin AB-005: Procedures for Approval of Local Equivalencies
Administrative Bulletin AB-028: Pre-application and Pre-addendum Plan review
Procedures
Ordinance No. 43-14
DISCUSSION :
(A) Summary of Ordinance No. 43-14
1. Voluntary program that allows one unauthorized dwelling unit per lot that existed prior to January 1,
2013 to pursue legalization with DBI and Planning.
2. Units with current Notices of Violation shall be suspended if owner opts to pursue legalization and
cleared if the unit is legalized within one year.
3. Units that have pursued no-fault evictions with the Rent Board after March 2014 must wait either 5 or
10 years before they may apply for legalization
4. Capital improvement costs for legalization cannot be passed through to the tenant occupant, and the
owner must provide temporary relocation compensation to the tenant occupant if applicable per Rent
Board standards.
5. Legalized units cannot pursue subdivision or condo conversion with DPW.
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17
(B) OWNER ANONYMITY:
Prior to submittal of the screening form to DBI for filing, the applicant may pursue the screening process
anonymously. Anonymity is no longer possible after submittal of the screening form to DBI for filing.
(C) SCREENING PROCESS:
DBI will provide an initial screening process that is non-binding to help owners understand the
estimated costs to legalize before filing an official application. Owners may hire an engineer or design
professional or contractor for representation. The owner or professional agent may go to the Unit
Legalization Counter on the 1st Floor of 1660 Mission Street to meet informally with DBI Technical
Services staff to arrive at a cost estimate. DBI staff may consult with the Fire Department if applicable.
Following the screening process, the owner or professional agent may formally apply for legalization
with the Planning Department and submit building permit applications with DBI. Electrical and plumbing
permits will also be required.
(D) SCREENING FORM:
The Screening Form identifies all the building code issues applicable to legalization. The screening
form will not be used by the Department in an official capacity.
Attached to the Screening Form is the Checklist requiring floor plans for the entire building and a site
plan showing location of all structures on the subject lot; evidence from Water Department, telephone,
gas or electric records, written lease agreements, etc. showing dwelling unit to be legalized existed
prior to January 1, 2013; assessment/costs prepared by licensed contractor, architect or engineer that
outlines compliance plan to meet codes (or any equivalencies DBI and Planning agree upon); etc.
(E) FUNDING SOURCES:
DBI will provide information on available funding sources for building code compliance including the
CALHOMESF loan from the Mayor’s Office of Housing and Community Development.
(Also see Attachment B: Checklist item 38)
Page 2 of 22
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 3 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17
(F) DETERMINATION OF EQUIVALENCIES:
Through pre-application meeting (see AB-028) or AB-005, DBI and Fire shall determine whether
building code equivalencies are applicable to the various code issues related to legalization.
Director of DBI and Fire Marshall shall determine whether equivalencies from previous building code
cycles may apply to facilitate authorization of existing units under Planning Code 207.3, and coordinate
with Zoning Administrator in drafting a joint Administrative Bulletin DBI and Planning determine are
necessary/helpful to implement this ordinance. Any such AB developed jointly or separately shall be
completed within one year of the effective date of this ordinance (May 2015).
(G) REPORT TO ASSESSOR:
Legalized units may (or can) increase the property value, and shall be reported to the Assessor when
completed, so property taxes may increase as a consequence of legalization. Provide all floor plans
(before and after), cost documents and any documents included with application. Final application
should be recorded with the Office of the Assessor-Recorder.
(H) RENT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS:
If the building where the unit is being legalized is subject to the Rent Ordinance, the legalized unit shall
also be subject to the Rent Ordinance.
(I) EFFECTIVENESS OF PROGRAM:
Director of DBI and the Zoning Administrator must issue a joint report on the effectiveness of the
legalization program six months after the ordinance takes legal effect, and this report must be updated
every six months for three years. After this initial 3-year program period, the updated legalization list
shall be included in the City’s annual housing inventory. The Planning Department shall create and
maintain a Master List of authorized/legalized units.
(J) MONITORING FEE:
DBI will suspend collection of the $52 monthly monitoring fee tied to any NOV where the owner has
filed an application to legalize one unit, per this ordinance, as an additional incentive to make the
owners/public aware of the option to legalize.
Page 3 of 22
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 5 ===
City and County of San Francisco London N. Breed, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O., Director
Legalization of Dwelling Units Installed Without a Permit
SCREENING FORM – No fee to file
The Screening Form shall be completed by a California licensed architect, civil or structural
engineer or contractor. Submittal of this Screening Form is to summarize the evaluation
performed on the building and to identify code issues related to the legalization of existing
unauthorized dwelling units under Ordinance No. 43-14.
Submit the completed Screening Form (with the supporting documents) either:
• As a pdf attachment to unitlegalization@sfgov.org with “Unit Legalization Screening
Submittal” in subject line; or
• As a hardcopy by U.S. mail to: 49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 San Francisco, CA
94103 Attn: Technical Services
BLOCK / LOT NUMBER
ADDRESS
CONTACT (OWNER OR AGENT)
SECTION 1 – ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
Contact Name Contact Telephone Contact Email
Contact Mailing Address
SECTION 2 – DOCUMENTATION OF EXISTING UNAUTHORIZED DWELLING
UNITS AND IDENTIFICATION OF RELATED CODE ISSUES
☐ Attach floor plans for the entire building to demonstrate egress or other code issues
☐ Attach site (plot) plan showing the location of existing buildings, other structures on the
site, property lines and locations of adjacent streets or alleys.
☐ Assessment/costs prepared by licensed contractor, architect or engineer that outlines
compliance plan to meet codes (or any equivalencies subject to approval by DBI, Fire
and Planning):
Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 - San Francisco CA 94103
Phone (628) 652-3720 – www.sfdbi.org Rev 2/22/2021

=== PAGE 6 ===
Information Sheet G-17 Attachment A Unit Legalization Screening Form
Identification of code issues: Estimated cost for compliance:
Total estimated cost for compliance =
☐ Owner also to provide evidence from Water Department, telephone, gas or electric records, written
lease agreements, etc. showing dwelling unit to be legalized existed prior to January 1, 2013;
Previously approved Permit Application ☐ Original construction documents ☐
Previously approved Plan ☐ Water Department bill ☐
Certificate of Final Completion ☐ Telephone bill ☐
Written Lease Agreement ☐ Gas or Electric records ☐
Other ☐
Page 2 of 3

=== PAGE 7 ===
Information Sheet G-17 Attachment A Unit Legalization Screening Form
SECTION 3 – DESIGN PROFESSIONAL/CONTRACTOR & OWNER AFFIDAVIT
Under penalty of perjury, the Design Professional/Contractor certifies that the information
provided and the Owner/Agent certifies that the information provided in Section 1 of this section
are correct to the best of their knowledge.
5.1. Design Professional: [Professional Stamp
Here]
Date stamped and signed
(NOTE: In lieu of stamp, Contractor shall provide license number and
expiration date)
Firm Name
Design Professional Telephone Design Professional Email
5.2. Owner / Agent:
 Owner
 Agent
Signature Date
FOR DBI USE ONLY
DBI has received the materials submitted and filed under “Legalization of ☐
dwelling units installed without a permit”.
Further discussions on code issues and equivalencies on compliance will be
via pre-application meetings or Administrative Bulletin AB-005.
Date received by DBI
Page 3 of 3

=== PAGE 8 ===
Information Sheet G-17 Attachment A UUnniitt LLeeggaalliizzaattiioonn SSccrreeeenniinngg FFoorrmm
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
`
Page 4 of 4

=== PAGE 9 ===
City and County of San Francisco London N. Breed, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O., Director
ATTACHMENT B
Legalization of Dwelling Units Installed Without a Permit
Checklist
The intent of this Checklist is to provide a general guideline for the legalization of dwelling units
installed without a permit. This checklist may not cover all code issues related to the legalization
process.
Referenced Codes:
• San Francisco Building Code (SFBC)
• San Francisco Existing Building Code (SFEBC)
• San Francisco Planning Code
• San Francisco Fire Code (SFFC)
• San Francisco Mechanical Code (SFMC)
• San Francisco Plumbing Code
• San Francisco Electrical Code ( SFEC)
• San Francisco Energy Code
• California Historical Building Code (CHBC)
* Code section referenced is SFBC unless noted otherwise.
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
1. Applicable codes shall be SF Building Code
(SFBC), San Francisco Existing Building Code
(SFEBC), SF Mechanical Code (SFMC), SF
Electrical Code (SFEC), SF Plumbing Code,
SF Energy Code (SFEC), and SF Planning
Code, SF Fire Code (SFFC) and California
Historical Building Code (CHBC).
Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 - San Francisco CA 94103
Phone (628) 652-3720 – www.sfdbi.org Rev 2/22/2021

=== PAGE 10 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
2. Rent Board Verification. Ordinance No. 43-
14 states that the Planning Department must
verify that certain no-fault evictions have not
occurred within certain time frames. The
applicant shall check whether or not they meet
those criteria. If such an eviction has occurred
within the limited timeframe, the legalization
may not be processed, even if the un-
authorized unit could otherwise meet the
Building Code requirements. The Planning
Department will verify that information with the
Rent Board during the permit review process.
3. A dwelling unit is a room or suite of two or more Planning
rooms that is designed for, or is occupied by, Code
one family doing its own cooking therein and Sections
having only one kitchen. A housekeeping room 102.7 &
as defined in the Housing Code shall be a 102.13
dwelling unit for purposes of this Code. For the
purposes of this Code, a live/work unit shall not
be considered a dwelling unit.
4. Landscaping. Pursuant to Planning Code Planning
Section 132, 20 percent of the front setback Code Section
area shall be remain unpaved and devoted to 132
plant material, including the use of climate
appropriate plant materials. Please indicate
compliance with this requirement on the plans.
A link to the Guide to the San Francisco Green
Landscaping Ordinance is below:
http://www.sf-
planning.org/ftp/files/publications_reports/Guid
e_to_SF_Green_Landscaping_Ordinance.pdf
5. Permeability. Pursuant to Planning Code Planning
Section 132, the front setback area shall be at Code Section
least 50 percent permeable so as to increase 132
stormwater infiltration. The permeable surface
Page 2 of 14

=== PAGE 11 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
may be inclusive of the area counted towards
the landscaping requirement; provided,
however, that turf pavers or similar planted
hardscapes shall be counted only toward the
permeable surface requirement and not the
landscape requirement. Please indicate
compliance with this requirement on the plans.
A link to the Guide to the San Francisco Green
Landscaping Ordinance is below:
http://www.sf-
planning.org/ftp/files/publications_reports/Guid
e_to_SF_Green_Landscaping_Ordinance.pdf
6. Street Tree. When a dwelling unit is proposed, Planning
including legalizing an illegal dwelling unit, the Code Section
property must comply with the street tree 138
requirements. One tree of 24-inch box size is
required for each 20 feet of frontage of the
property along each street or alley, with any
remaining fraction of 10 feet or more of
frontage requiring an additional tree. Such
trees shall be located either within a setback
area on the lot or within the public right-of-way
along such lot. This property is required to
provide one street tree. Please indicate
compliance with this requirement on the plans.
7. Street Tree Referral. Prior to Planning
Department approval, you must obtain a referral
form Department of Public Works (DPW). DPW
determines whether or not required trees can
feasibly be planted. Please bring to the following
to DPW: (1) a completed Tree Planting and
Protection Checklist, (2) project plans [11”x17”
is acceptable] and (3) a DPW tree planting
application. Submittals can be made to DPW’s
offices at 1155 Market St or electronically at
www.sfdpw.org -> “Services A-Z” -> “Trees”.
Page 3 of 14

=== PAGE 12 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
After doing their analysis and fieldwork, DPW
will provide the applicant with a signed referral
form with their determination which should then
be provided to Planning staff. Planning staff
cannot approve the building permit application
without the referral form from DPW. This
information may be submitted directly to Kate
Conner at the Planning Department, 1650
Mission Street, 4th Floor. The Tree Protection
and Planting checklist is linked below:
http://sf-
planning.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?d
ocumentid=8321
8. Bicycle Parking. When a dwelling unit is Planning
proposed, including legalizing an illegal Code Section
dwelling unit, the property must comply with 155
bicycle parking requirements. In order to
legalize an illegal unit per Planning Code
Section 207.3, bicycle parking spaces must be
provided on-site in a secure, weather protected
space meeting dimensions set in Zoning
Administrator Bulletin No. 9, easily accessible
to residents and not otherwise used for
automobile parking or other purposes. Each
space is required to be 2’-0” by 6’-0. An area
devoted to bicycle parking must be shown on
the plans. A link to Zoning Administrator
Bulletin No. 9 is below:
http://www.sf-
planning.org/ftp/files/publications_reports/ZAB
_BicycleParking_9-7-13.pdf
9. Provide floor plans for the entire building to
demonstrate exiting and other issues. The
Floor Plans must show all existing rooms
adjacent to the dwelling unit to be legalized.
Label the use of each room.
Page 4 of 14

=== PAGE 13 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
10. Provide Site (Plot) Plan: Show the location of
existing buildings, other structures on the site,
property lines and locations of adjacent streets
or alleys.
• Show dimensions between dwelling unit
walls and property lines.
• Show the direction of true North.
11. Provide evidence from Water Department,
telephone, gas or electric records, written lease
agreements, etc. Showing dwelling unit to be
legalized existed prior to Jan. 1 , 2013
12. Minimum ceiling heights. Occupiable 1208.2
spaces, habitable spaces and corridors shall
have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6
inches.
13. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens, storage 1208.2
rooms and laundry rooms shall be permitted to
have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet.
14. Ceiling height. The means of egress shall have 1003.2
a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches.
15. Foundation slab needs to be lowered if (12)
(13) or (14) are not met.
16. Minimum room widths. Habitable spaces, 1208.1
other than a kitchen, shall be not less than 7
feet in any plan dimensions. Kitchens shall
have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet
between counter fronts and appliances or
counter fronts and walls.
17. Room area. Every dwelling unit shall have no 1208.3
less than one room that shall have not less than
Page 5 of 14

=== PAGE 14 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
120 square feet of net floor area. Other
habitable rooms shall have a net floor area of
not less than 70 square feet.
Exception: Kitchens are not required to be of
a minimum floor area.
18. Efficiency Dwelling Units. 1208.4
Unless modified by local ordinance pursuant to
Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1,
efficiency dwelling units shall comply with the
following:
1. The unit shall have a living room of not
less than 150 square feet of floor area.
An additional 100 square feet of floor
area shall be provided for each
occupant of such unit in excess of two.
2. The unit shall be provided with a
separate closet.
3. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen
sink, cooking appliance and
refrigeration facilities, each having a
clear working space of not less than 30
inches (762 mm) in front. Light and
ventilation conforming to this code shall
be provided.
4. The unit shall be provided with a
separate bathroom containing a water
closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
19. Private garages and carports Separation. 406.3.4.
Separations shall comply with the following:
(1) The private garage shall be separate from
the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of
gypsum board, not less than 5/8-inch in
thickness, applied to the garage side. Garages
beneath habitable rooms shall be separated
from all habitable rooms above by not less than
a 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board or
Page 6 of 14

=== PAGE 15 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
equivalent and ½-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum
board applied to structures supporting the
separation from habitable rooms above the
garage. Door openings between a private
garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped
with either solid wood doors or solid or
honeycomb core steel doors not less than
1.3/8inches in thickness or doors in compliance
with Section 716.5.3 with a fire protection rating
of not less than 20 minutes. Openings from a
private garage directly into a room used for
sleeping purpose shall not be permitted. Doors
shall be self-closing and self-latching.
(2) Ducts in a private garage and ducts
penetrating the walls or ceiling separating the
dwelling unit, including its attic area, from the
garage shall be constructed of sheet steel of
not less than 0.019 inches, in thickness, and
shall have no openings into the garage.
(3) A separation is not required between a
Group R-3 and U carport, provided the carport
is entirely open on two or more sides and there
are not enclosed areas above.
20. Fire-resistance rating. 711.3
Horizontal assemblies separating dwelling
units in the same building and horizontal
assemblies separating sleeping units in the
same building shall be a minimum of 1-hour
fire-resistance-rated construction.
21. Noise Insulation Enforcement Procedures. Administrative
APPLICABILITY. Bulletin
The noise requirements apply only to AB-026
residential use buildings for which permits were
applied after August 22, 1974, i.e. to Form 1
and 2 applications. They do not apply to
buildings constructed before 1974 in which
Page 7 of 14

=== PAGE 16 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
new units are created through alterations,
additions or change of use.
22. Section 1030 Emergency Escape and 1030
Rescue
Information
1030.1 General. In addition to the means of
Sheet No.
egress required by this chapter, provisions
shall be made for emergency escape and EG-03
rescue openings in Group R occupancies.
Basements and sleeping rooms below the
fourth story above grade plane shall have at
least one exterior emergency escape and
rescue opening in accordance with this section.
Where basements contain one or more
sleeping rooms, emergency escape and
rescue openings shall be required in each
sleeping room, but shall not be required in
adjoining areas of the basement.
Such openings shall open directly into a public
way or to a yard or court that opens to a public
way.
Exceptions:
1. In Groups R-1 and R-2 occupancies
constructed of Type I, Type IIA, Type
IIIA or Type IV construction equipped
throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3.1.1.
2. Basements with a ceiling height of less
than 80 inches (2032 mm) shall not be
required to have emergency escape and
rescue openings.
3. Emergency escape and rescue
openings are not required from
basements or sleeping rooms that have
an exit door or exit access door that
opens directly into a public way or to a
yard, court or exterior exit balcony that
opens to a public way.
Page 8 of 14

=== PAGE 17 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
4. Basements without habitable spaces
and having not more than 200 square
feet (18.6 m2) in floor area shall not be
required to have emergency escape and
rescue openings.
1030.2 Minimum size. Emergency escape
and rescue openings shall have a minimum net
clear opening of 5.7 square feet (0.53 m2).
Exception: The minimum net clear opening for
grade-floor emergency escape and rescue
openings shall be 5 square feet (0.46 m2).
1030.2.1 Minimum dimensions. The
minimum net clear opening height dimension
shall be 24 inches (610 mm). The minimum net
clear opening width dimension shall be 20
inches (508 mm). The net clear opening
dimensions shall be the result of normal
operation of the opening.
1030.3 Maximum height from floor.
Emergency escape and rescue openings shall
have the bottom of the clear opening not
greater than 44 inches (1118 mm) measured
from the floor.
(For R3, also see Information Sheet no. EG-03)
23. Landings shall have a width not less than the 1010.1.6
width of the stairway or the door, whichever is
greater. Doors in the fully open position shall
not reduce a required dimension by more than
7 inches (178 mm). Where a landing serves an
occupant load of 50 or more, doors in any
position shall not reduce the landing less than
one-half its required width. Landings shall have
a length measured in the direction of travel not
less than 44 inches (1118 mm).
Page 9 of 14

=== PAGE 18 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
24. Habitable rooms (excluding kitchens, home 1205.1
offices and media rooms) within a dwelling unit Exception
or congregate residence shall be provided with
natural light by means of exterior glazed
openings in accordance with Section 1205.2.
25. Natural light. The minimum net glazed area 1205.2
shall be not less than 8% of the floor area of 1205.2.1
the room served.
Adjoining spaces. For the purpose of natural
lighting, any room is permitted to be considered
as a portion of an adjoining room where one-
half of the area of the common wall is open and
unobstructed and provides an opening of not
less than one-tenth of the floor area of the
interior room or 25 square feet, whichever is
greater.
26. Stairways within dwelling units and exterior 1205.4
stairways serving a dwelling unit shall have an
illumination level on tread runs of not less than
1 foot-candle.
27. The openable area of the openings to the 1203.5.1
outdoors shall be not less than 4 percent of the
floor area being ventilated.
28. Enclosed attic & enclosed rafter spaces shall 1203.2
have cross ventilation not be less than 1/150 of
the area of the ventilated space. A minimum of
1” airspace shall be provided between
insulation and the roof sheathing.
29. Garage and carports. 406.3.7
Ventilations shall be provided as follows:
Natural ventilations shall be required, and such
space shall be provided with ventilation outlets
Page 10 of 14

=== PAGE 19 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
in the walls or exterior doors. The total net area
of such ventilation outlets shall be 200 square
inches for a space up to 1,000 square feet in
area and shall be increased 30 square inches
for each additional 200 square feet of floor area
up to maximum floor area of 3,000 square feet.
30. Indicate the location of attic access.
31. Sleepers and sills on a concrete or masonry 2304.12.1.4
slab that is in direct contact with earth shall be
of naturally durable or preservative-treated
wood.
32. Wood framing members, including wood 2304.12.1.2
sheathing, that are in contact with exterior
foundation walls and are less than 8 inches
(203 mm) from exposed earth shall be of
naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.
33. Exiting through the garage area shall meet all AB-020
requirements of Administrative Bulletin
AB-020.
34. Fire-resistance rating requirement for exterior Table 602
walls based on fire separation distance shall
meet requirements of Table 602.
35. Openings is exterior walls shall comply with 705.8
Sections 705.8.1 through 705.8.6.
36. Approval of New Openings in New and Existing AB-009
Building Property Line Walls shall meet
requirements of Administrative Bulletin AB-
009.
Page 11 of 14

=== PAGE 20 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
37. Bathrooms. Rooms containing bathtubs, 1203.5.2.1
showers, spa and similar bathing fixtures shall
be mechanically ventilated in accordance with
the California Mechanical Code.
38. Energy Conservation. Qualified historical CHBC
buildings or properties covered by this part are Section 8-
exempted from compliance with energy 901.5
conservation standards.
39. Access Compliance. All publicly funded 1.9.1.1.3
buildings used for congregate residences or for Chapters 11A
one- or two-family dwelling unit purposes shall & 11B
conform to the provisions applicable to living
accommodations.
40. Carbon monoxide alarms. 420.6.2.2
When a permit is required for alterations,
repairs or additions with a total cost or
calculated valuation exceeding $1,000,
existing dwellings or sleeping units with a fossil
fuel-burning heater or appliance, fireplace or
an attached garage shall have a carbon
monoxide alarm installed in accordance with
Section 420.6.2. Carbon monoxide alarms
shall only be required in the specific dwelling
unit or sleeping unit for which the permit was
obtained.
41. Smoke alarms: SFBC
When the valuation of an addition, alteration or Section
repair to a Group R Occupancy exceeds 3401.8.1
$1,000 and a permit is required, or when one or;
or more sleeping rooms are added or created SFEBC
in existing Group R Occupancies, smoke Section 401.5
alarms shall be installed in accordance with
Section 907.
Page 12 of 14

=== PAGE 21 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
42. Preliminary review by Plumbing Inspection San Francisco
Division. Plumbing
Call 558-6570 as required. Code
43. Preliminary review by Electrical Inspection San Francisco
Division. Electrical
Call 558-6570 as required. Code
44. School Impaction Fee Administration. Information
The California State Legislature had amended Sheet No.
School Facilities Fees legislation and exempts G-11
any residential addition of less than 500 square
feet.
45. 17912. Rules and regulations promulgated California
pursuant to the provisions of this part and Health and
building standards published in the State Safety Code
Building Standards Code, relating to the Section
erection or construction of buildings or 17912
structures, shall not apply to existing buildings
or structures or to buildings or structures as to
which construction is commenced or approved
prior to the effective date of the rules,
regulations, or building standards, except by
act of the Legislature, but rules, regulations,
and building standards relating to use,
maintenance, and change of occupancy shall
apply to all hotels, motels, lodging houses,
apartment houses, and dwellings, or portions
thereof, and buildings and structures
accessory thereto, approved for construction or
constructed before or after the effective date of
such rules, regulations, or building standards.
Page 13 of 14

=== PAGE 22 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-17 ATTACHMENT B
Estimated
Code Requirements Code Cost for Remark
Section Compliance
46. Assessor-Recorder’s Office: Legalized units
shall be reported to the Assessor when
completed for applicable property tax
assessment. Under State law, the Assessor is
responsible for establishing a taxable value on
property located in the City & County of San
Francisco. A property that legalizes a unit
under this program may be subject to an
increase in the assessed value depending on
whether the building was originally purchased
with the existing illegal in-law unit and the
extent to which new construction occurs to
bring the unit into compliance. Please contact
the Assessor’s Office with additional questions:
call 311 or visit assessor@sfgov.org.
47. Other.
Page 14 of 14