=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-19
DATE : November 3, 2014
SUBJECT : General
TITLE : Permit Processing Guidelines for Play Areas and Play Components at
the City and County of San Francisco (City) Owned, Leased, or Publicly
Funded Sites
PURPOSE : To clarify the permit processing by the different permit review agencies for
play area and play components at City owned or leased or publically funded
sites as scoped by the CBC Section 11B-240 for play areas.
REFERENCES : California Building Code (CBC) Sections:
11B-240 Play Areas
11B-1008 Play Areas
San Francisco Building Code (SFBC) Sections:
106A Permits
California Health and Safety Code (CHSC) Sections:
115725-115750 (January 1, 2008)
DISCUSSION : Since January 1, 1992, the State of California has regulated the design and
construction of play equipment for public use under the CHSC Sections
115725-115750. Prior to 2014, the CBC did not cover building permit
requirements for playgrounds, play equipment, and play areas. As of January
1, 2014, the 2013 CBC adopted the accessibility provisions for playgrounds,
play equipment, and play areas from the 2010 Americans with Disabilities Act
Standards (2010 ADAS) Section 11B. Building permits are now clearly
required.
Before 2014, new construction or alteration plans for City play area projects were reviewed for
accessibility and CHSC compliance by Mayor’s Office on Disability (MOD) or Department of Public Works
Disability Access Coordination (DPW-DAC). But unless the play area was part of larger capital
improvement projects that included new construction or alterations of existing buildings, or other
permitted structures such as retaining walls, the other permit agencies such as Department of Building
Inspection (DBI), Planning Department and San Francisco Fire Department (SFFD) lacked a defined
permit review role.
TECHNICAL SERVICES DIVISION
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401
Website: www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-19
Project Classifications:
A. City Projects are buildings or sites that are owned, leased, or publicly funded in whole or in part
and by or on behalf of the City of San Francisco.
1. Examples include but are not limited to City offices and clinics, City occupied leased
spaces, libraries, parks, and playgrounds including those built by philanthropic groups on City land,
publicly funded affordable housing, and community development projects.
2. Funding sources include but are not limited to General Obligation Bonds, General Funds,
RPD Community Opportunity Fund, MOH and MOHCD, OEWD, philanthropic gifts and State or Federal
grants issued to the City.
3. City Projects shall be reviewed for accessibility compliance by either the Mayor’s Office on
Disability (MOD) or the DPW Disability Access Coordinator (DPW-DAC) prior to submittal to Department
of Building Inspection (DBI) for permit processing. DPW-DAC reviews City Projects designed, managed,
or built by DPW. MOD reviews the other City Projects including publicly funded affordable housing.
B. General Projects are play area installations that are located on private property and are privately
funded. These projects will be reviewed for accessibility and other building code requirements by DBI.
C. San Francisco Unified School District or San Francisco Community College District Projects are
play area installations that are located on public properties which are under the jurisdiction for permits
and reviews for accessibility by other state agencies. DBI, MOD or DPW-DAC have no role overseeing
these projects.
City Projects Types with play areas and play components:
A. New Construction or Alteration Projects Containing New Play Areas. These are new
construction or alteration projects where a new play area is ancillary to the buildings and facilities
constructed or altered on the site. These projects may include the construction of privately or publicly
funded housing, recreation facilities, libraries or community centers. Path of travel obligations may be
required where a new play area is added or substantially replaced.
B. Existing Recreation Projects Adding New Play Areas. These are existing sites where new play
areas, play components and other related recreational elements are added to or replaced at the site; the
site may have existing buildings or other habitable structures that are not being proposed for alteration.
Path of travel obligations may be required where a new play area is added or substantially replaced.
C. Failing Playgrounds. These are existing play areas, play components and play area use zones
that are being replaced due to failure. Examples include Recreation and Parks Department’s 2012 Bond
Failing Playgrounds project that specifically seeks to replace composite play structures that contain
arsenic impregnated wood, deteriorated fiberglass and metal and play area surfacing composed of sand
and/or deteriorated rubber, material.
D. Play Area Maintenance Projects. These are maintenance and or repairs to existing play areas
and play components equipment where less than 50% of the play structures or composite components
are replaced. Note: this type of repair project would not typically require a Building Permit.
Page 2 of 4

=== PAGE 3 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-19
Agency reviews for City Projects:
Site improvements with new construction or alteration of buildings, facilities and play areas will be
reviewed by:
A. MOD or DPW-DAC for CBC Chapter 11B Accessibility compliance.
B. Planning Department for CEQA and other Planning requirements, when applicable.
C. DBI for permitting, structural, architectural requirements and for the assignment of an
occupancy classification.
D. SFFD for exiting if the area is 750 square feet or greater, and if the play area is enclosed by a
perimeter fence or other facility, or if a play area of any size is located on an above grade roof top or
below grade. As part of their review, SFFD will verify egress path, egress width calculations,
and occupant load.
E. PUC for water related features.
F. Electrical, plumbing when appropriate.
Permit Application submittal and routing for City Projects:
Pre-permit submittal
City Projects shall be reviewed for accessibility by either DPW-DAC or MOD prior to filing for a permit.
(See discussion under Project Classifications Section A3)
Permit Submittal
A. For all projects, permit intake begins at the 1st floor DBI Public Information Counter:
1. DBI reviews the scope of work and determines that the description of work is clearly
indicated on the permit application as new construction, replacement, or alteration of play area and play
components.
2. For City Projects, DBI also verifies the plans have been reviewed and approved by either
MOD or the DPW-DAC.
3. DBI verifies that the applicant has two sets of plans, and that the submittal meets all
applicable standards including that the sheet size is 11”x17” minimum.
4. DBI refers the applicant to Central Permit Bureau at the first floor for intake for larger
projects. Larger projects will be taken in for processing and routed through the different applicable
reviewing authorities.
Page 3 of 4