=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco London N. Breed, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-23
DATE : July 27, 2017
CATEGORY : General
SUBJECT : Addition of Dwelling Units per Ordinance Nos. 162-16, 95-17 and 162-17
REFERENCE : San Francisco Existing Building Code Chapter 4D: Mandatory Earthquake
Retrofit of Wood Frame Buildings
Administrative Bulletin AB-004: Priority Permit Processing Guidelines
Administrative Bulletin AB-005: Procedures for Approval of Local
Equivalencies
Administrative Bulletin AB-028: Pre-application and Pre-addendum Plan
Review Procedures
Administrative Bulletin AB-094: Definition and Design Criteria for Voluntary
Seismic Upgrade of Soft-Story, Type V (wood-frame) Buildings
Administrative Bulletin AB-106: Procedures for Implementation of SFEBC
Chapter 4D
Administrative Bulletin AB-107: Application of Engineering Criteria in SFEBC
Chapter 4D
Information Sheet No. G-11: School Impaction Fee Administration
Information Sheet No. G-17: Legalization of Dwelling Units Installed Without a
Permit
Information Sheet No. S-07: Interpretation of SFEBC Section 402D, Exception 1
Information Sheet No. S-08: Miscellaneous Clarification of AB-107 on
Engineering Criteria in SFEBC Chapter 4D
Information Sheet No. FS-05: Sprinkler Systems Requirements for Addition or
Legalization of Dwelling Unit
San Francisco Planning Code
San Francisco Fire Code
San Francisco Administrative Code
California Historical Building Code
California Energy Code
California Civil Code Section 1954.52
Ordinance No. 162-16: Construction of Accessory Dwelling Units
Ordinance No. 95-17: Planning Code - Construction of Accessory Dwelling Units
Page 1
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-23
Ordinance No. 162-17: Planning Code - Construction of Accessory Dwelling
Units
DISCUSSION :
(A) Summary of Ordinance No. 162-16, No. 95-17 and No. 162-17
1. ADUs are permitted in any zoning district where a residential use is permitted.
2. Ordinance No. 162-16 allows construction of Accessory Dwelling Units in multi-unit buildings and
single-family homes that require administrative waivers from the Planning Code; and establishes the
controls regulating such units (See Section (E); Planning Requirements).
3. Ordinance No. 95-17 establishes controls and procedures for the construction of Accessory Dwelling Units
in single-family homes that do not require administrative waivers from the Planning Code. (See Section
(E); Planning Requirements).
4. Ordinance No. 162-17 further amends controls in the Planning Code for construction of ADUs.
5. Ordinance No. 162-16 authorizes the Zoning Administrator to waive certain aspects of the Planning Code,
if necessary, to allow these accessory dwelling units to be built.
6. Ordinance No. 162-16 and No. 162-17 state that for projects that require administrative waivers to add an
ADU, buildings that have pursued no-fault evictions with the Rent Board must wait either 5 or 10 years
before applying to construct an ADU (5 years for an owner move-in eviction; 10 years for certain other
no-fault evictions). With exception are some temporary evictions for capital improvements.
7. Ordinance No. 162-16 states that if building owners participating in the City’s Mandatory Seismic
Retrofitting under Chapter 4D of San Francisco Existing Building Code or voluntary seismic retrofitting
programs per Administrative Bulletin AB-094 are seeking to add accessory dwelling units, the ADUs will be
subject to different conditions regarding eligibility for subdivision or condo conversion, as well as permitting
processes.
8. The Mandatory Seismic Retrofitting under SFEBC Ch 4D applies to wood-frame buildings of three or
more stories or two stories over a basement or underfloor area that have any portion extending above
grade, containing five or more residential dwelling units where the permit to construct was applied for
prior to January 1, 1978; and, where the building has not yet been seismically strengthened.
Building permits and Certificates of Final Completion and Occupancy under this program shall clearly
state, “Soft Story Retrofit per SFEBC Ch 4D” and the Permit Application Form shall specify engineering
criteria on the description of work. The unit count shall remain the same.
Building permits for Soft Story Retrofit shall not include other work. Other work shall be under a separate
permit with a separate set of plans. Both permits may not refer to the same set of plans.
Page 2
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 3 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-23
For mixed-used occupancies, soft story retrofit work shall be divided into two (2) building permits: one for
the residential portion and one for the non-residential portion. The valuation for these permits shall be
pro-rated by the square footage of the floor areas. Both permits may refer to the same set of plans.
Building permits for Soft Story Retrofit shall not include reference to the addition of a dwelling unit.
9. The voluntary seismic upgrade of soft-story buildings per Administrative Bulletin AB-094 is applicable to
any Type V (wood-frame) buildings, including single family homes, apartment buildings, and
condominium buildings.
Applicants under this program shall complete Attachment I of AB-004: Documentation of Priority Permit
Processing. An approved copy of this attachment shall be attached to the building permit application
form. Building permits under this program shall clearly state, “Soft Story Retrofit per AB-094” under the
description of work on the Building Permit Application Form and Certificate of Final Completion and
Occupancy. The unit count shall remain the same.
Building permits for Soft Story Retrofit shall not include other work. Other work shall be under a separate
permit with a separate set of plans. Both permits may not refer to the same set of plans.
Building permits for Soft Story Retrofit shall not include reference to the addition of a dwelling unit.
10. In multi-unit buildings and single-family homes that require Planning Code administrative waivers to add
the ADU(s), the added dwelling unit shall not extend beyond the built envelope, except as follows:
Buildings may be raised up to three feet to create ground-floor ceiling heights suitable for residential use.
Such raising of the buildings shall comply with vertical addition requirements of SFEBC Section 402 and full
seismic retrofit requirements of entire building per SFEBC Section 301.2. Such raising of the building shall
also comply with any applicable Planning Code requirements such as: height limits, shadow requirements,
and historic preservation review. Please see the Planning Department Requirements for more information
(Section E).
11. In existing single-family homes that do not require Planning Code administrative waivers to add the ADU,
expansion is permitted within the buildable area of the lot. Such expansion shall comply with Planning Code
requirements including neighborhood notification and design review. If a single-family home does not
require administrative waivers to add the ADU or propose any expansion, and complies fully with Planning
Code Section 207(c)(6)(C), the Department shall approve the permit within 120 days from receipt of the
application.
The building cannot be undergoing Mandatory Seismic Retrofitting under Chapter 4D of the San Francisco
Building Code or voluntary seismic retrofitting programs per Administrative Bulletin AB-094.
Please see the Planning Department Requirements for more information (Section E).
(B) Determination of Equivalencies
Page 3
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 4 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-23
Through a pre-application meeting (see AB-028 or AB-005) or through development of information sheets,
DBI and Fire shall determine whether Building and Fire Code equivalencies are applicable to the various
code issues related to the addition of dwelling units.
Code equivalencies on sprinkler requirements, to help facilitate addition of dwelling units, are addressed in
Information Sheet No. FS-05.
(C) Building Code Requirements
The addition of dwelling units needs to meet San Francisco Building Code and Fire Code requirements.
(D) Energy Code Requirements
The addition of dwelling units needs to meet Title 24 California Energy Code.
Please note that legalization of dwelling units per Ordinance No. 43-14 does not need to meet Title 24
California Energy Code. (See Information Sheet No. G-17 Attachment B, Item 38)
(E) Planning Requirements
In multi-unit buildings and single-family homes that need administrative waivers to add ADU(s), an ADU
shall be constructed entirely within the existing building envelope or auxiliary structure, as it existed three
(3) years prior to the time of the application for a building permit. In these cases, an ADU can be created
from 25% of the gross square footage of ground or basement level of existing Dwelling Unit(s).
In single-family homes that do not require administrative waivers for open space, rear yard, or reduced
exposure to add the ADU, one ADU can be constructed from the existing Dwelling Unit within the buildable
area of the lot. In addition, on lots with single-family homes that do not require administrative waivers to add
the ADU, the ADU can be created from within the built envelope of an existing and authorized auxiliary
structure on the lot. These ADUs must have independent access from the existing residence or accessory
structure and sufficient side and rear setbacks for fire safety. No parking is required for the ADU.
On lots that have four existing Dwelling Units or fewer, one Accessory Dwelling Unit is permitted; on lots
that have more than four existing Dwelling Units, there is no limit on the number of Accessory Dwelling
Units permitted. In addition, on lots with buildings undergoing Mandatory Seismic Retrofitting under
Chapter 34B of San Francisco Building Code (Chapter 4D of San Francisco Existing Building Code,
effective January 1, 2017) or voluntary seismic retrofitting programs per Administrative Bulletin AB-094,
there is no limit on the number of ADUs that can be added on the lot.
Accessory Dwelling Units shall not be permitted in any building in a Neighborhood Commercial District or in
the Chinatown Community Business or Visitor Retail Districts if it would eliminate or reduce a ground-story
commercial space.
Neighborhood notification pursuant to Planning Code Sections 311 and 312 is not required for Accessory
Dwelling Units that comply with the requirements below:
Page 4
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 5 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-23
Buildings undergoing seismic upgrades may be raised up to three feet to create heights suitable for
residential use on lower floors and be exempt from neighborhood notification or a variance to expand a
nonconforming building; however the building must comply with height limits.
Expansions are permitted in limited circumstances for multi-unit buildings and single-family homes that
require administrative waivers to add ADU(s). The first is under cantilevered or column supported rooms.
The second is under decks that do not encroach into the required rear yard, except for decks that are
supported by columns or walls other than the building wall to which it is attached and are multi-level or more
than 10 feet above grade. The third expansion is as an infill into light wells provided that the expansion is
not visible from anywhere off-site, and is against a blank neighboring wall. These spaces must have existed
as of July 11, 2016. Please note that these expansions cannot occur into the required rear yard.
Neighborhood notification is not required for these expansions.
Neighborhood notification pursuant to Planning Code Sections 311 and 312 is required for Accessory
Dwelling Units that comply with the requirements below:
Expansions are permitted within the buildable area of the lot for single-family homes that do not require
administrative waivers for open space, rear yard or reduced exposure to add the ADU. These expansions
would require neighborhood notification and be subject to design review.
The Zoning Administrator may waive rear yard, parking, open space, and density requirements and may
reduce the amount of dwelling unit exposure required. Typically a new dwelling unit must face a street or
conforming rear yard; however, the Zoning Administrator may reduce this requirement so that qualifying
windows may face an open area that is no less than 15’X15’ and is open to the sky. A qualifying window is
defined in the Housing Code and must be located within a living area (e.g. living room, dining room,
bedroom, or kitchen) that is at least 120 square feet in area.
All other Planning Code requirements must be met including: landscaping and permeability requirements in
the front setback, and bicycle parking. In addition, each unit must meet the reduced exposure requirement
stated above. If the addition of accessory units requires exterior changes on a visible façade, design review
and historic preservation review may be required.
If the subject lot contains any Rental Units under the Rent Ordinance at the time the building permit
application is filed, and Planning Code administrative waivers are granted, the new unit will also be subject
to the Rent Ordinance. This will be accomplished through a regulatory agreement that the owner will be
required to sign as a condition of approval, known as a Costa Hawkins Agreement. See Section (F).
ADU permits will not be approved over-the-counter if they are taking advantage of the Program specified in
Ord. No. 95-17 or No. 162-16.
A Preliminary Project Assessment (PPA) will be required only if 25 or more Accessory Dwelling Units are
proposed on one lot.
An Accessory Dwelling Unit shall not be used for Short-Term Residential Rentals.
The ADU cannot pursue subdivision or condo conversion with DPW with the exception of a building that was
a condominium building for three years prior to July 11, 2016 and had no Rental Unit. However, an
Page 5
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 6 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-23
Accessory Dwelling Unit added in coordination with a building undergoing mandatory seismic retrofit per
SFEBC Ch 4D or voluntary seismic retrofit per AB-094, shall maintain eligibility for subdivision or condo
conversion, should a program become available.
Please consult with Planning Department staff to ensure that the property is eligible to add an accessory
dwelling unit and other Planning Code requirements.
(F) Rent Control Requirements
In addition to the Planning requirements listed in Section (E), if the existing building contains any Rental Units
under the San Francisco Residential Rent Stabilization and Arbitration Ordinance (the “Rent Ordinance,”
Chapter 37 of the Administrative Code), and the Zoning Administrator grants a complete or partial waiver of
the requirements of the Planning Code, the property owner shall enter into an Regulatory
Agreement with the City under section (c)(4)(H) that meets the requirements of California Civil Code Section
1954.52(b) (the Costa Hawkins Rental Housing Act) for an exception to the rent control exemptions in Section
1954.52(a) and subjects the ADU(s) to the Rent Ordinance as a condition of approval.
Furthermore, please be aware that if the property owner is proposing to convert an existing garage, laundry
room or storage space that is part of a tenancy subject to Rent Ordinance to an Accessory Dwelling Unit, the
property owner must have one of the “just cause” reasons specified in Rent Ordinance Section 37.9(a) to
sever such a housing service from the tenancy and must follow the legal procedures to recover possession of
the garage, laundry room or storage space from the tenant(s). It is recommended that you consult with an
attorney to see if a specified housing service can be severed from an existing tenancy. You may also contact
the San Francisco Rent Board for basic information regarding this requirement.
This agreement must be fully executed prior to the City’s issuance of the first construction document.
(G) School Impaction Fee Administration
Letter from SFUSD to DBI dated 12/15/89 informing that the California State Legislature had amended
School Facilities Fees legislation and exempts any residential addition of less than 500 square feet. (See
Information Sheet No. G-11)
(H) Report to Assessor – Recorder’s Office
Added dwelling units shall be reported to the Assessor when completed for applicable property tax
assessment.
Under State law, the Assessor is responsible for establishing a taxable value of property located in the City
& County of San Francisco. Please contact the Assessor’s Office with additional questions, call 311 or visit
assessor@sfgov.org.
(I) Permit Process for Filing a Building Permit Application for the addition of a Dwelling Unit per
Ordinance No. 162-16:
1. Applicant needs to complete the Screening Form (see Attachment B) and file it at the Soft Story
Counter (Window 8 on Ground Floor of 1660 Mission Street).
Page 6
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 7 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-23
2. A building permit (Form 3/8: "Application for Building Permit Additions, Alterations or Repairs") is
required. The Screening Form needs to be stapled to the application form.
3. The scope of work should be clearly defined and carried through the permit application, job card, and
CFC (Certificate of Final Completion and Occupancy).
4. The permit application should clearly indicate the present use and the proposed use in Items Nos. 7
and 7A on the building permit application form.
5. The permit application should clearly indicate the number of existing dwelling units and the number of
proposed dwelling units in Item Nos. 9 and 9A on the building permit application form.
6. The address for the new dwelling unit is not required for the building permit application.
If addition of a new address is required, submit a request for appointment via email with all the relevant
information to: dbi.cpbrequest@sfgov.org once the permit to add the dwelling unit has been issued.
7. The accessory dwelling unit should be counted as a new dwelling unit in the dwelling unit count.
8. The added dwelling unit can be an efficiency dwelling unit or any other type of dwelling unit per
Building Code.
9. The following stamp shall be stamped on “description of work” on the building permit application form:
Add Unit per Ordinance Nos.
162-16, 95-17 & 162-17
CPB staff shall input in the “description of work” in the PTS as follows:
“Addition of dwelling units per Ordinance Nos. 162-16, 95-17 & 162-17”
10. Separate permits are required for Soft Story Retrofit and adding dwelling units. One permit for the soft
story work and one permit to add a unit dwelling unit are required with separate sets of plans. Both
permits may not refer to the same set of plans.
The permit for adding dwelling units shall make reference to the permit application number for Soft
Story Retrofit.
The permit for adding dwelling units shall not be issued prior to issuance of permit for Soft Story
Retrofit. The CFC for permit to add dwelling units shall not be issued prior to issuance of CFC for
permit for Soft Story Retrofit.
These provisions are applicable for Item #4 in Section (A).
11. The applicant needs to submit a minimum of two (2) sets of plans on sized 11” x 17” or greater. A plot
plan, key plan and architectural floor plans need to be included.
12. The applicant needs to submit Title 24 Energy Calculations and Compliance Forms.
Page 7
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street – San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 – FAX (415) 558-6401 – www.sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 8 ===
(Rev. 6/13/2018)

=== PAGE 9 ===
IS G-23 Attachment B
City and County of San Francisco London N. Breed, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O., Director
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) Screening Form
Section 1 of this screening form shall be completed by the owner or agent. Section 2 shall only be
completed by the owner. For more information, please visit: sf.gov/topics/accessory-dwelling-unit-adu.
SECTION 1 – ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
Select one of the ADU programs below. For more information regarding these programs, please visit:
sfplanning.org/adu
☐ State/Hybrid ADU Program or Local ADU Program (check one box only)
☐
Please include this completed Screening Form and the supporting documents with the ADU
permit application.
Address: Block/Lot:
Contact Name Contact Telephone Contact Email
☐ Owner or Agent
☐
Signature Date
SECTION 2 - OWNER AFFIDAVIT - HOUSING SERVICES
(To Be Completed by Owner Only)
A. Owner(s) acknowledges that pursuant to Rent Ordinance 37.2(r) severance of garage facilities, parking
facilities, driveways, storage space, laundry rooms, decks, patios, and gardens on the same lot, or
kitchen facilities and lobbies within an SRO from an existing tenancy requires a "just cause”. The
issuance of a permit does not constitute a just cause. A signature below asserts that the Owner(s) is
aware of these legal requirements and is proceeding with filing a permit to convert existing space within
their building into an Accessory Dwelling Unit(s), or owner signature asserts that property is not subject
to these controls in Rent Ordinance or project does not propose removal of housing services, therefore
B & C as described below, are not required as part of Screening Form process.
Printed Name of Owner Signature Date
B. AND Owner must notify affected tenants of the Owner(s) intention to convert aforementioned space(s) to
Accessory Dwelling Unit(s):
i) Notice to be posted for 15-days in a common area of the building; and
ii) Notice to be mailed to all tenants and to the property owner.
C. AND Submit copy of posted/mailed notice, postmarked letter to owner, photograph of posted notice, and
copy of mailing list with this Screening Form.
Page 1 of 1
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco, CA 94103
Updated 2/21/2024
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org