=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco London N. Breed, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. G-29
DATE : September 25, 2024
SUBJECT : General
TITLE : Commercial-to-Residential Adaptive Reuse – Code Provisions
PURPOSE : The purpose of this Information Sheet is to highlight pertinent code provisions
and possible code exceptions to aid commercial-to-multi-family residential
adaptive reuse projects in the San Francisco downtown area per San
Francisco Building Code Section 111A and Planning Code Section 210.5.
REFERENCES : San Francisco Building Code, Current Edition
San Francisco Existing Building Code, Current Edition
California Building Code (CBC), Current Edition
California Existing Building Code (CEBC), Current Edition and Revised 2022
CEBC Intervening Code Cycle, effective 7/1/2024
San Francisco Green Building Code, Current Edition
California Historical Building Code, Current Edition
California Mechanical Code, Current Edition
San Francisco Fire Code (SFFC), Current Edition
California Fire Code (CFC), Current Edition
San Francisco Planning Code (SFPC), Current Edition
Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Existing Buildings, American Society of
Civil Engineers / Structural Engineering Institute (ASCE/SEI) 41-16 and
ASCE/SEI 41-23
Recommended Post-Earthquake Evaluation and Repair Criteria for Welded
Steel Moment-Frame Buildings, FEMA-352
American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) 342
Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) 13, and Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler
Systems in Low-Rise Residential Occupancies, NFPA 13R
NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code
Page 1 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco, CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29
OVERVIEW:
Adaptive reuse projects are building alteration projects that involve the change of occupancy
classification of a building, as a whole or of a portion of a building. The California Existing Building Code
(CEBC) requires buildings that undergo changes of occupancies to comply with the California Building
Code (CBC) for the resulting occupancy, per CEBC 506, under the Prescriptive Compliance method.
The purpose of this information sheet is to identify pertinent code provisions and to highlight possible
code exceptions to aid commercial-to-multi-family residential adaptive reuse projects under SFBC 111A.
This information sheet is applicable to buildings in the downtown area, as defined in SFPC Section 210.5.
Where design complexities and hardships exist that make it difficult or infeasible to comply with code
requirements, design equivalencies to code requirements may be proposed by the design professional
for consideration and approval per SFDBI Administrative Bulletin AB-005 Procedures for Approval of
Local Equivalencies. A pre-application meeting may also be requested to confirm code interpretations.
Alternatively, CEBC Chapter 10 of the Work Area Compliance method may be used for change of
occupancy alterations. Note that a change of occupancy from commercial to multi-family residential
results in a higher hazard category per CEBC Chapter 10 Table 1011.5 Means of Egress Hazard
Categories and Table 1011.6 Heights and Areas Categories.
DISCUSSION:
Building Envelope
Any building converting from commercial occupancy to multi-family residential occupancy must comply
with the allowable building height, number of stories, and floor area specified in CBC Chapter 5. The new
residential occupancy must be fully fire sprinklered and comply with CBC 903.2.8.
California Energy Code (CEC) Section 180 requirements for insulation and fenestration shall apply for
projects with building envelope changes. For qualified historic buildings, the California Historical Building
Code (CHBC) may allow exceptions for existing elements to remain, or for new elements where the
historic significance of the building or character-defining features are threatened.
Exterior Walls & Exterior Wall Opening Protection
Exterior walls are required to have fire-resistance ratings in compliance with CBC 705.5, with the required
rating dependent on the fire separation distance from property line and on the type of construction of the
building. The change from commercial occupancy to multi-family residential occupancy would generally
not trigger the need to increase the fire resistance rating of the exterior walls, as residential occupancies
have either less restrictive or equal fire rating requirements for exterior walls as commercial occupancies.
However, the change to residential occupancy may require certain exterior walls to be rated for fire
exposure from both sides of the wall, whereas in prior occupancies, rating for fire exposure was required
only from the inside. If not already in compliance, the fire-resistance rated assemblies of exterior walls
shall be improved to comply with the ratings, as set forth in CBC 705.5.
Existing non-rated exterior walls may be maintained, provided the exterior wall is protected with a water
curtain design approved by the Department of Building Inspection (DBI) and San Francisco Fire
Department (SFFD) as a local equivalency to fire-resistance rating for fire exposure from the exterior
side. There are limitations to the amount of wall openings allowed in exterior walls per CBC 705.8. The
exterior walls of a building are additionally protected through CBC 705.8 which specifies the maximum
area of exterior wall openings based on the building’s distance away from the property line. Wherein the
existing building is non-conforming to the code requirements, and existing area of openings exceed the
allowable area of openings, or where the project proposes to provide additional exterior wall openings
exceeding that allowed by the Code, then design equivalencies for exterior wall opening protection may
be proposed by the Design Professional for consideration. SFDBI Administrative Bulletin AB-009 Local
Page 2 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 3 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29
Equivalency for Approval of New Opening in New and Existing Building Property Line Walls may provide
a path for accommodation.
Means of Egress
The means of egress components will be evaluated to comply with SFBC and CBC Chapter 10. Some
major elements to consider are the number of exits required per story, minimum distance required
between exits, minimum common path-of-travel distances, exit access travel distances, emergency
escape and rescue access/paths for sleeping rooms, etc.
There are allowances for existing buildings, such as:
• Existing stairways are allowed exceptions to current code compliance where the existing space
and construction does not allow a reduction in pitch or slope. CEBC 506.3
• There are size tolerances for operable windows serving as emergency escape and rescue
openings. CEBC 506.4
• Accessible means of egress are not required unless triggered by CBC 11A or 11B. Where CBC
11B is applicable, the exceptions in CBC 11B-207 apply.
• Qualified historic buildings are permitted to use existing fire escapes per CHBC 8-502.5 where
the fire escapes are inspected and improved to comply with SFDBI Administrative Bulletin AB-
019.
Interior Environment - Ventilation
All new dwelling units shall be provided with natural or mechanical ventilation.
In addition, other than high-rise residential buildings, public corridors, public hallways and other public
spaces having openings into adjoining dwelling units, also need to be naturally ventilated by means of
openable windows. In lieu of the required exterior openings for natural ventilation, mechanical ventilation
may be provided as detailed in SFBC 1202.5.
Independent exhaust systems are required for the kitchen hood, bathroom(s), and dryer exhausts.
Adaptive reuse projects in the Air Pollutant Exposure Zone shall incorporate an enhanced ventilation
system to comply with San Francisco Health Code Article 38, mandated by the San Francisco
Department of Public Health.
Interior Environment – Lighting
Natural light is required for all habitable rooms per CBC and SFBC 1204.1. Where obtaining direct natural
light through an exterior opening from the public way or yard is a hardship, light courts with dimensions
complying with CBC 1205, or skylights may be used. See SFDBI Information Sheet IE-02 for additional
clarification for sizing yards and courts adjacent to exterior openings that provide the required natural
light and/or ventilation.
Where direct natural light is not achievable, natural light may be obtained through exterior glazed
openings of adjoining spaces per CBC 1204.2.1 and SFDBI Information Sheet IE-01.
Habitable rooms in qualified historic buildings are permitted to have windows complying with CHBC 8-
303.6 for light and ventilation.
Minimum Unit Size
SFBC 1208.4, Efficiency Dwelling Units, establishes minimum sizing requirements for dwelling units,
including required kitchen amenities, and bathroom fixtures, with existing buildings requiring larger unit
Page 3 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 4 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29
sizes than those for new construction. SFDBI will take into consideration, when accompanied with SFDBI
Administrative Bulletin AB-005 Approval of Local Equivalency, to allow commercial-to-multi-family
residential adaptive reuse projects with minimum dwelling unit size for new construction rather than that
required in existing buildings. In such a case, SFDBI will evaluate the current or proposed egress systems
in relationship to the proposed occupant load in accordance with the requirements of CBC 1004 and CBC
1005.
Seismic
Buildings undergoing vertical and/or horizontal additions shall satisfy current code requirements for wind
and seismic design of new buildings per SFEBC 502.
Where work involves substantial structural or non-structural alterations as listed below, the building’s
lateral-force-resisting system shall satisfy the current code requirements as outlined in the CBC.
Reduced seismic forces are permitted in accordance with SFEBC 503.11.
1. Structural Alterations: Structural elements that provide support to more than 30 percent of the
total floor and roof area of the building or structure (as defined by SFEBC 202 Substantial
Structural Alteration) are modified. The elements counted in this assessment include all structural
elements accumulated since the original building was built. SFEBC 503.11
2. Non-Structural Alterations: Non-structural alterations are made to elements such as walls,
partitions, or ceilings on 2/3 or more of the number of stories of the building. SFEBC 503.11.1
Reduced seismic forces are defined in the CEBC as seismic forces that are reduced to 75 percent of the
forces prescribed in SFBC 304.4 for new buildings. These retrofit requirements may also be met by
employing a performance-based design, which may result in a more efficient and cost-effective project.
Performance-based design using the ASCE41 standard is permitted by the CEBC. For Risk Category II,
the following performance objectives are required per CEBC 304.3.2:
1. Structural life-safety performance objective (S-3) when subjected to the Basic Safety
Earthquake (BSE) -1E earthquake hazard level, and
2. Structural collapse-prevention performance objective (S-5) when subjected to the BSE-2E
earthquake hazard level.
Alternatively, concrete buildings requiring retrofit, per the aforementioned triggers, may meet the
forthcoming seismic retrofit standard being developed under the Mayor’s Executive Directive 24-01. The
standard permits the building to meet the structural collapse-prevention performance objective (S-5)
when subjected to the BSE-1E earthquake hazard level, as long as the following specific seismic
deficiencies are addressed: weak story, discontinuous elements, non-ductile moment frames, slab
punching shear at columns, shear governed columns or wall piers, inadequate bearing supports for
beams or slabs, and weak connections between walls and flexible floor or roof diaphragms. A
commentary of these potential deficiencies and of the mitigation requirements may be found in
Attachment 1 of this information sheet. This alternative engineering design criteria for concrete buildings
will be made available in the SFEBC once pending legislation is approved.
Note that this alternative criteria for concrete buildings may be used unless the building is triggered to be
seismically retrofitted per the California state requirements as defined in CEBC 503.11, where Substantial
Structural Alterations are defined in CEBC 202.
Where work does not involve substantial alterations mandating the building to satisfy full or reduced
seismic forces, the following actions are recommended:
1. Perform a seismic evaluation of the building to understand the building’s vulnerabilities, and
perform targeted strengthening as required.
2. For non-ductile concrete buildings, perform improvements as required to meet one of the
acceptable retrofit criteria noted above. Concrete buildings undergoing retrofit to the current code
using full or reduced seismic forces, or to the forthcoming concrete retrofit standard, will not be
Page 4 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 5 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29
mandated to retrofit the building again based on limitations and moratorium detailed in the
standard being developed under the Mayor’s Executive Directive 24-01.
3. For welded steel moment frame buildings, inspect existing joint connections for weld fractures,
and, where needed, perform repairs per FEMA 352. Partial joint penetration column splices are
another potential vulnerability in steel buildings recommended to be inspected. For the seismic
evaluation recommended in Item 1 above, it is recommended that ASCE 41-23, which
incorporates AISC 342 be used as the basis of the evaluation.
Accessibility and Federal Fair Housing Act:
The change of occupancy from commercial to residential occupancy will be evaluated for the need to
comply with the accessibility requirements of CBC Chapter 11A or 11B.
In general, the change of occupancy to residential use within the existing building envelope does not
invoke CBC Chapter 11A. However, if the scope of work includes an addition to the existing building,
where the addition when considered alone meets the definition of ‘covered multifamily dwelling’, then the
addition, common areas, and path of travel to the new addition will be subjected to Chapter 11A.
Projects which meet the definition of public housing will be subjected to the requirements of CBC Chapter
11B for a certain percentage of units to accommodate mobility and communication features, as well as
other accommodations for accessibility.
High-rise Buildings
High-rise buildings have additional special detailed requirements as set forth in CBC 403. In particular,
the following are notable requirements to keep in mind for commercial-to-residential conversion of high-
rise buildings:
A minimum of two fire service access elevators (FSAE) are required for buildings with an occupied floor
more than 120 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, CBC 403.6. Where the
existing building did not have FSAE’s or did not house two elevator banks, and a hardship to install a
new elevator exists, alternative equivalent facilitations may be proposed as an equivalency to satisfy CBC
3003 FSAE. The proposed equivalency shall be reviewed and approved by SFDBI and SFFD in
accordance with SFDBI Administrative Bulletin AB-005.
All portions of the high-rise building shall have a smoke control system per CBC 909. Where an equivalent
smoke control/management protection system is approved by SFFD as a local equivalency, the
mechanical system shall be designed to support the smoke control/management protection system
accordingly. SFDBI Administrative Bulletin AB-047 Specific Submittal Criteria for Reports, Special
Inspections, and Final Acceptance Testing of Smoke Control Systems submittal requirements apply.
Additional emergency systems, where required, such as fire pumps, emergency generators, fire
command centers, and others shall comply with CBC 403. Equivalencies may be proposed and will be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
Use of Historical Building Code
Buildings deemed by SF Planning as a qualified historic building as defined in the California Historical
Building Code (CHBC) shall be subject to the regulations and standards of the CHBC, provided that the
continued use of the building does not constitute a distinct hazard to life safety as defined in the CHBC.
CHBC 8-901.5 exempts qualified historic buildings from compliance with energy conservation standards.
However when new non-historic lighting and space conditioning system components, devices, appliances
and equipment are installed, they shall comply with the requirements of Title 24, Part 6 of the CEC, except
where the historic significance of the building or character-defining features are threatened.
CHBC 8-502.5 allows for the use of an existing fire escape as one of the required means of egress,
provided that it extends to the ground, is easily negotiated, and is in good working order. Fire escapes
shall comply with the standards of SFDBI Administrative Bulletin AB-019.
Page 5 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 6 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29
California Energy Code
Mechanical and plumbing systems shall be required to comply with the CEC. The energy code
requirements consist of mechanical and plumbing equipment efficiency/controls and mechanical
ventilation requirements.
Lighting and power distribution systems shall comply with CEC for multi-family occupancies. The
requirements consist of efficiency and control of lighting and power distribution systems.
San Francisco Green Building Code
Adaptive reuse projects are exempt from San Francisco Green Building Code requirements as long as
the alteration to the building does not fall within the definition of Major Alteration. Major Alteration is
defined as alterations and additions in existing B, M, or R occupancies of 25,000 gross square feet or
more, where the interior finishes are removed, and there are significant upgrades to the structural and
mechanical, electrical, and/or plumbing systems.
Projects that are Major Alterations shall meet San Francisco Green Building Code, SFDBI Administrative
Bulletin AB-093 Implementation of Green Building Regulations GS-2 submittal and include the
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design / GreenPoint Rated (LEED/GPR) score card.
SAN FRANCISCO FIRE DEPARTMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Low-Rise Buildings Conversion from B to R-2 Occupancy
1. The new R-2 occupancy must be fully sprinklered per NFPA 13 (National Fire Protection
Association), or per NFPA 13R, as indicated in CFC Section 903.3.1.2, and per SFFD
Administrative Bulletin AB #2.04. If car stackers, Energy Storage Systems (ESS), or Electric
Vehicles (EV) charging stations are proposed, compliance with applicable SFFD Administrative
Bulletins AB # 4.25 and AB # 4.29 is required.
2. Class I Standpipe must be provided for the new R-2 occupancy where required by the CFC
905.3.1 and the SFFC Section 905.
3. The new R-2 occupancy shall be required to have a code complaint Fire Alarm (FA) system per
current CFC and NFPA 72 and SFFD AB # 2.01. All dwelling units and sleeping units are required
to have UL 268 smoke detectors with low-frequency sounder bases. 120 VAC smoke alarms are
not permitted by SFFD. Carbon Monoxide detection will be required where required by CFC,
Section 915. Other signaling systems such as Two-Way Emergency Communications Systems
(2-Way ECS) may be required by the SFFD on a case-by-case basis.
4. A radio test for Firefighters Emergency Two-Way Communication shall be performed within the
new R-2 occupancy per SFFD AB # 2.01 Addendum G after the R-2 construction is completed. If
the radio test passes, a new Emergency Responders Radio Communications System (ERRCS)
is not required. However, if the radio test fails, an ERRCS shall be installed per current applicable
codes.
5. Existing elevators are not required to be upgraded to meet current code requirements for gurney
size, hoistway construction, and Firefighters Emergency Operation (FEO), including Phase I and
Phase II emergency operation. The existing elevators may remain unchanged, or if desired by
the owner/applicant, may be modernized to meet current California Elevator Safety Orders Group
4 Regulations. If the existing elevators are modernized, a code compliant FEO interface with the
new R-2 fire protection systems is required.
6. The SFFD will only require the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)/Mechanical Air-
Moving system to shut down upon smoke detection per the current California Mechanical Code
(CMC) requirements.
Page 6 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 7 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29
High-Rise Building Conversions from Commercial to Multi-Family Residential Occupancy
In general, all SFFD requirements for low-rise buildings shall also apply to high-rise buildings. There is
not a distinction in code application for commercial to residential adaptive reuse projects for the two SFFD
high-rise classifications:
1. Existing high-rise buildings (buildings having a site permit application before 10/1974)
2. Life-safety high-rise buildings (buildings having a site permit application after 10/1974)
Additional requirements for high-rise buildings (both classifications) are listed below:
1. If the existing high-rise building has an existing wired Fire Department communication system
(phone-jack system) which can be maintained and operational in the new R-2 occupancy – a radio
test will not be required and an ERRCS will not be required by the SFFD.
2. If the existing high-rise building does not have a Fire Command Center (FCC), a new FCC shall
be required for the new R-2 Occupancy. The FCC room sizes not meeting CFC requirements may
be evaluated and accepted on a case-by-case basis if specific building limitations prove a
hardship to meet current CFC room size requirements.
3. If the existing high-rise building does not have a fire pump, the SFFD may not require a fire pump
on a case-by-case basis where the sprinkler system demand for the new R-2 occupancy can be
met without a fire pump.
4. If the existing high-rise building does not have a water tank, equivalencies may be proposed.
5. If the existing high-rise building does not have Firefighters Air Replenishment System (FARS),
the new R-2 occupancy will not be required to have FARS.
6. The new FA system for the new R-2 occupancy shall be required to have a code complaint
Emergency Voice Alarm Communications System (EVACS) utilizing speakers and manual live
paging messages per the SFFD AB # 3.05. The new EVACS shall meet Level-3 survivability
requirements per the CFC and NFPA 72. All dwelling units and sleeping units will be required to
have UL 268 smoke detectors with low-frequency sounder bases (120 VAC smoke alarms are
not permitted by SFFD). Carbon monoxide detection shall be provided where required by CFC
Section 915.
7. A Fire Alarm system light-emitting diode (LED) annunciator shall be provided at the FCC and shall
comply with the SFFD AB # 3.01 specific requirements.
8. The new R-2 occupancy shall have a partial evacuation scheme that complies with the SFFD AB
# 3.05.
_____________________S_e_p_t_em__b_e_r _2_5,_ 2_0_2_4___ ______________________S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _2_7_, _2_0_2_4__
Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O. Date Ken Cofflin Date
Director Fire Marshal
Department of Building Inspection San Francisco Fire Department
Attachment 1: Potential Deficiencies in Concrete Buildings and Mitigation Requirements
This Information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version,
visit our website at sfdbi.org
Page 7 of 7
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 8 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29 ATTACHMENT 1
Last Modified September 2024
Potential Deficiencies in Concrete Buildings and Mitigation Requirements
The following are requirements for identifying, evaluating, and retrofitting certain potential
seismic deficiencies in concrete buildings.
Potential Deficiency Requirements Commentary
1 Weak story: The The structure shall not If the structure has a weak story or
structure includes one have vertical structural extreme weak story, to meet the
or more stories having irregularity of Type 5a nor alternate engineering criteria for
lateral strength less than Type 5b in Table 12.3-2 concrete buildings, the weak story
the story above. of ASCE 7. must be eliminated by retrofitting.
Otherwise, the structure must meet
ASCE 41 with a performance
objective of Structural Collapse
Prevention (S-5) with the BSE-2E
earthquake hazard level.
2 Lateral-force-resisting- The building shall not If the structure has either of the
element irregularity: have a horizontal specified irregularities in-plane or
The lateral-force- structural irregularity out-of-plane offset or discontinuity
resisting system Type 4 of Table 12.3-1 or to meet the alternate engineering
includes one or more vertical structural criteria for concrete buildings, the
concrete walls or frames irregularity Type 4 of irregularity must be eliminated by
that are not continuous Table 12.3-2 of ASCE 7. retrofitting. Otherwise, the structure
to the foundation. must meet ASCE 41 with a
performance objective of Structural
Collapse Prevention (S-5) with the
BSE-2E earthquake hazard level.
3 Non-ductile moment Comply with all of the Section 18.7.3 requires strong-
frame: The main lateral- following: column weak-beam strength
force-resisting-system proportions. Section18.6.6.1
1. Moment frame
includes concrete requires columns to be flexure
columns shall satisfy
moment frames that do governed. Section 18.6.5.1 requires
Section 18.7.3 of ACI 318
not satisfy strong- beams to be flexure governed.
and Section 18.7.6.1 of
column-weak-beam Such requirements are essential for
ACI 318.
requirements or that ductile behavior of concrete
have shear-governed 2. Moment frame beams moment frames.
columns or beams. shall satisfy Section
18.6.5.1 of ACI 318.
Page 1 of 4
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco, CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 9 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29 ATTACHMENT 1
Last Modified September 2024
Potential Deficiency Requirements Commentary
For each column or wall
4 Shear-governed 1. Shear governed columns or wall
pier, comply with at least
concrete column or piers can be a serious deficiency
wall pier: The structure one of the following: that leads to building collapse.
includes one or more 1. Columns and wall Retrofitting columns or wall piers by
concrete columns or piers shall have design jacketing, such as with fiber
wall piers that is shear- shear strength satisfying reinforced polymer (FRP), can be
governed and is Section 18.7.6.1 of used to make the elements flexure
susceptible to failure ACI 318 or greater than governed.
resulting in loss of the maximum shear that
2. If failure of columns or wall piers
gravity load support. can be delivered to the
can be shown not to cause collapse
column or wall pier. For
because of an alternate load path
wall piers, joint faces
for gravity load, the shear-governed
shall be taken as the top
behavior is permitted.
and bottom of the clear
An example of an acceptable
height of the wall pier.
alternate load path is a beam that
2. Provide or demon-
can span over a failed column or
strate an alternate load
wall pier to supports not susceptible
path to support design
to failure, or an added column
gravity load assuming a
adjacent to the susceptible column
failure of the column or
or wall pier. The alternate load path
wall pier such that it
is to be a complete load path, i.e. to
cannot support gravity
the foundation and supporting soil,
load.
that does not rely on non-compliant
3. For wall piers in elements.
buildings that do not have
3. If the building meets the quick-
a torsion irregularity ratio
check for shear at the specified
TIR per Section
level and does not have a TIR
12.3.2.1.1 of ASCE 7
greater than 1.4, it is judged that
exceeding 1.4,
there is enough wall that the
demonstrate compliance
consequences of shear failure of
with the Tier 1 Quick
wall piers will be limited. Option 3 is
Check for shear stress in
not permitted for structures with
concrete walls in that
high plan-torsion irregularity
story in each plan
because of a concern that columns
direction per Section
or wall pier on one side of the
4.4.3.3 of ASCE 41.
building plan could suffer undo
Pseudo seismic force V
damage in such a case.
shall be 2 times the
pseudo seismic force at
the BSE-1E earthquake
level, but need not
exceed that at BSE=2E.
System modification
factor M shall be for
s
Collapse Prevention
performance.
Page 2 of 4
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco, CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 10 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29 ATTACHMENT 1
Last Modified September 2024
Potential Deficiency Requirements Commentary
5 Punching shear in Comply with one or more 1. Section 18.14.5 addresses
concrete slab: One or of the following: acceptable punching shear stress
more concrete floor or from gravity load as a function of
1. Demonstrate
roof slabs is supported story drift, a key indicator of
compliance with Section
by columns without susceptibility to punching shear of
18.14.5 of ACI 318 with
beams and is slab-column connections.
earthquake force E and
susceptible to loss of
design story drift ∆ taken 2. Section 8.7.4.2.2 requires two
gravity load support x
as two times the earth- slab bottom bars to pass between
following punching
quake force and story the column cage longitudinal bars in
shear failure.
drift at the BSE-1E each plan direction. Section 8.7.5.6
earthquake level, but requires two prestressing tendons
need not exceed that at to pass through the column cage in
BSE-2E, determined in each plan direction. The slab
accordance with Section bottom bars or tendons help
7.4. of ASCE 41. prevent collapse of the slab if
punching shear initiates.
2. Demonstrate
compliance with at least 3. If the existing condition is
one of the following in susceptible to punching shear, a
each plan direction at possible retrofit solution is to
each column: provide a path of support such as a
collar at the top of a column that
(a) Section 8.7.4.2.2 of
supports the bottom of the slab
ACI 318. The slab bottom
beyond the expected punching
bars must be continuous
shear failure plane.
through the column or
spliced using mechanical
or welded splices.
(b) Section 8.7.5.6 of ACI
318.
3. Provide an alternate
load path to support
design gravity load, as-
suming a failure at the
slab-column interface
such that the slab-column
interface cannot support
gravity load.
Page 3 of 4
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco, CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org

=== PAGE 11 ===
INFORMATION SHEET G-29 ATTACHMENT 1
Last Modified September 2024
Potential Deficiency Requirements Commentary
6 Weak connection of For each flexible floor or The objective of this item is to make
concrete wall to roof diaphragm, comply it unlikely that a concrete wall will
flexible diaphragm: with CEBC Chapter A2, separate from a flexible floor or roof
The structure includes or ASCE 41 with a diaphragm in a way that could lead
one or more concrete performance objective of to floor or roof collapse.
walls supporting one or Structural Collapse
For floor or roof diaphragms that
more flexible Prevention with the BSE-
have timber framing in combination
diaphragms, where the 2E earthquake level.
with a complete grid of concrete floor
wall is not adequately
beams, CEBC Chapter A2 may be
anchored to the
used to demonstrate that existing
diaphragm.
concrete floor beams are connected
to the walls in such a way that they
resist out-of-plane forces on the
walls at least equal to the forces
prescribed in CEBC Chapter A2.
7 Inadequate length of Provide bearing length to In some cases, including at building
bearing connection: support gravity load, such expansion joints, concrete floor
One or more beams or that the bearing length structures, either cast-in-place or
slabs is supported by a satisfies all of the precast, have bearing supports. In
bearing connection with following: older structures such bearing
short bearing length. supports may not have adequate
1. Section 18.14.4.1(d) of
bearing length compared to
ACI 318.
earthquake displacement demands.
2. Two times the
1. Section 18.14.4.1(d) requires a
displacement demand at
bearing length of 5 inches for
the BSE-1E earthquake
beams, or 2 inches + L/180 for slabs.
level, determined in
accordance with Section
7.4 of ASCE 41, but need
not exceed that at BSE-
2E.
Page 4 of 4
Department of Building Inspection – Technical Services Division
49 South Van Ness Avenue, Suite 500 – San Francisco, CA 94103
(628) 652-3720 | sfdbi.org