=== PAGE 1 ===
City and County of San Francisco Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Department of Building Inspection Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director
INFORMATION SHEET
NO. S-09
DATE May 5,2015
CATEGORY Structural
SUBJECT Permit Process for Earthquake Brace + Bolt (EBB) Program
PURPOSE The purpose of this Information Sheet is to clarify the permit process for the
Earthquake Brace + Bolt (EBB) Program offered by the California Residential
Mitigation Program.
REFERENCE San Francisco Building Code (SFBC)
California Existing Building Code (CEBC), Appendix Chapter A3
Administrative Bulletin AB-1 08: Application of California Existing Building Code
Appendix Chapter A3
Information Sheet No. G-01: Signature on Plans
California Residential Mitigation Program's Earthquake Brace and Bolt website:
http://earthguakebracebolt.com
DISCUSSION
(A) Summary of Earthquake Brace + Bolt (EBB) Program
1. The EBB Program is administered by the California Residential Mitigation Program, a joint powers
authority created by the California Earthquake Authority and the Governor's Office of Emergency
Services.
2. Funds to Strengthen Your Foundation Program offers homeowners reimbursement funds up to
$3000 for a qualifying brace and bolt structural strengthening.
3. EBB is available to select ZIP codes in both Northern and Southern California.
4. Qualifying buildings typically were constructed before 1979, have raised wood first floor, and have
cripple wall that does not exceed four feet in height.
5. To participate in the program, the EBB requires homeowners to pre-qualify online at
http://earthquakebracebolt.com or call (877) 232-4300 to determine whether the building ZIP code
is included and whether building meets program criteria.
6. Structural strengthening work will conform to CEBC, Appendix Chapter A3.
Page 1 of 2
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street - San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 - FAX (415) 558-6401 - www.sfdbLorg

=== PAGE 2 ===
INFORMATION SHEET S-09
(B) Permit Process for Filing a Building Permit Application
1. A building permit (Form 3/8: "Application for Building Permit Additions, Alterations or Repairs") is
required
2. The description of work on the building permit application form -
a) Shall clearly state: "This permit is for work to be performed in general conformance with the
California Existing Building Code (CEBC), Appendix Chapter A3 (SFBC AB-1 08)"; and,
b) Provide specification for size, embedment and spacing of anchor bolts; e.g., 5/8" diameter X 10"
at 4'-0" o.C. with epoxy.
3. Two (2) sets of plans on minimum 11" x 17" size paper shall be prepared for work that meets
all of the requirements of CEBC, Appendix Chapter A3 and this Information Sheet. The plans
shall include:
a) Approximate length and height along each wall line;
b) Number of stories above each wall line or portion of wall line; and,
c) Approximate percentage of each wall line or portion of wall line proposed to be braced
and approximate location.
4. The plans need not be prepared by a licensed design professional, provided the proposed
design does not exceed the limitations under state law requiring a licensed design professional.
Notes:
a) See Information Sheet No. G-01
b) For permit application of work not conforming to all of the prescriptive requirements of
CEBC, Appendix Chapter A3, submittal documents shall be prepared by a licensed
design professional.
5. Permits that fully comply with Appendix Chapter A3 shall be issued over-the-counter. Field
inspection by Department staff shall verify that work is done in conformance with prescriptive
requirements.
OTHER CONDITIONS:
Other conditions will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the Supervisor or Manager.
Pre-application meeting andlor approval of AB-005 is required.
sjr/u;lr
Tomc~VE~;JF=
date I
Director
Department of Building Inspection
This Information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version, visit our
website at http://www.sfdbi.orll
Page 2 of 2
Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street- San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 - FAX (415) 558-6401 -www.sfdbi.org