--- Page 1 ---
Page 1 
 
 
MECHANICAL CODE 
2025 Edition 
  
PREFACE 
Text Format: 
   The text in this publication is formatted to allow the user to quickly and easily determine the 
source of the included material. Language derived from the 2025 California Code that 
is unchanged by local amendment is printed in shaded text (see below). Language constituting 
San Francisco amendments to the California Code is printed in unformatted (or “plain”) text. In 
either case, bold and/or italic typefaces may be used as appropriate for emphasis, etc. See below 
for examples. 
   To further simplify use of the San Francisco amendments with corresponding sections of the 
2025 California Code, explanatory remarks appearing in italics are provided (in boxes at the 
beginning of affected provisions) indicating whether the San Francisco amendment to the 
California Code is adding, revising, or replacing a section or portion of a section. 
   To summarize: 
Explanatory remarks are boxed and italicized. 
   Unchanged language from the 2025 California Code is shaded, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
   San Francisco amendments are printed in unformatted ("plain") text, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
Marginal Markings: 
   An arrow [ ← ] represents the location of language that has been deleted by San Francisco 
from the 2025 California Code. 
   A solid line represents a change from the original published edition of the 2025 San Francisco 
Mechanical Code. 
Historical Notations: 
   Language which has been added, amended, or deleted from the 2025 publication of the San 
Francisco Mechanical Code is indicated with an historical notation, setting forth the ordinance 
number and date of adoption. Additionally, a table is included below that lists and summarizes 
all legislation that has affected this Code and the other Building Inspection Commission codes 
after their initial enactment. 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
Page 2 
 
Chapter 1 
ADMINISTRATION 
Division I 
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 
See Division II Administration for San Francisco Mechanical Code administrative provisions. 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
Division II 
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101.0 – TITLE 
101.1 Revise this section as follows: 
101.1 Title. This document shall be known as the [ ← ] 2025 San Francisco Mechanical Code, 
may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.” 
SECTION 103.0 – DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY 
HAVING JURISDICTION 
103.1 Revise the first paragraph as follows: 
103.1 General. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be the Authority duly appointed to 
enforce this code. For such purposes, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the powers of 
a law enforcement officer. The Authority Having Jurisdiction, when necessary, may call upon 
the Police Department and other city agencies for aid or assistance in carrying out or enforcing 
any of the provisions of this code. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the power to 
render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to 
this code as deemed necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. 
Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall comply with the intent and purpose of this code. 
103.4 Revise the first paragraph as follows: 
103.4 Right of Entry. [ ← ] When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the 
provisions of this code or other codes or ordinances, or [ ← ] when the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a 
condition or violation of this code or other codes or ordinances that makes the building or 
premises unsafe, insanitary, dangerous or hazardous, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be 
permitted to enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties 
imposed upon the Authority having Jurisdiction by this code or other codes or 
ordinances, provided that where such building or premises is occupied, the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. Where such building or 
premises is unoccupied, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall first make a reasonable effort to 
locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request 
entry. Where entry is refused, the Authority Having Jurisdiction has recourse to every remedy 
provided by law to secure entry. 
103.5 Add the following section: 
103.5 Authority Having Jurisdiction May Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and 
enforce rules and supplemental regulations to clarify the application of its provisions. Such 
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this 

--- Page 3 ---
Page 3 
 
code. Such rules and regulations, commonly referred to as “Code Rulings” and “Administrative 
Bulletins,” supplemental to this code, shall not take effect until approved by the Building 
Inspection Commission and signed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction except in unusual 
circumstances where the Authority Having Jurisdiction has determined there is an immediate 
need to protect the public health and safety. When the Authority Having Jurisdiction finds that 
such circumstances exist, the Authority Having Jurisdiction may order immediate enforcement of 
a particular rule or regulation. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall arrange for a subscription 
service to such rules and regulations, the entire cost of which is to be borne by the subscribers. 
103.6 Add the following section: 
103.6 Code Revisions. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall transmit to the Building 
Inspection Commission, at intervals not exceeding three years, recommendations for changes to 
this code, based on studies of the following: 
   1.   Requests of the Board of Examiners for variances from this code, and for approvals of 
alternate materials, alternate designs and methods of construction. 
   2.   Code changes recommended by the Board of Examiners. 
   3.   Code changes recommended by the Code Advisory Committee or other bodies subordinate 
to the Building Inspection Commission. 
   4.   Results obtained and problems encountered from legal actions taken to correct code 
violations. 
   5.   Changes or improvements in materials, methods of construction or design and changes 
proposed by interested persons. 
   6.   Investigations of fire and structural damage to buildings, and of complaints of 
unsatisfactory mechanical system performance. 
   7.   Periodic changes to the California Mechanical Code and other State regulations which may 
affect this code. 
   8.   Administrative Bulletins and Code Rulings currently in effect. 
   9.   Violations of this code found on inspections or investigations. 
SECTION 104.0 – PERMITS 
104.2 Add item (6) as follows: 
   (6)   Replacement water heaters of not more than 100 gallons (378.54 liters) capacity are 
exempt from building permits when a new flue is not installed, but shall require plumbing 
permits. 
104.3 Replace this section as follows: 
104.3 Application for Permit. [ ← ] Applications for permits to perform regulated mechanical 
work shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in Chapter 1A of the Building 
Code and Chapter 1, Division II of the Plumbing Code. 
104.4 Replace this section as follows: 
104.4 Permit Issuance. [ ← ] Permit processing and issuance for regulated mechanical work 
shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in Chapter 1A of the Building Code and 
Chapter 1, Division II of the Plumbing Code. 
104.4.3 Replace this section as follows: 
104.4.3 Permit Expiration. [ ← ] Mechanical permits expire per Section 106A.4.4 of the San 
Francisco Building Code. Permit fees may be partially refunded if a written cancellation request 
is made to the Building Official prior to commencement of the permitted work and within 90 
days of the date of permit issuance. See Section 110A, Table 1A-R Refunds of the Building 
Code for refunds. 
104.5 Replace this entire section including subsections with the following section: 

--- Page 4 ---
Page 4 
 
 [ ← ] 104.5 Fees. Fees for regulated mechanical work shall be as set forth in Chapter 1A of the 
Building Code and in Chapter 1, Division II of the Plumbing Code. 
SECTION 106.0 – VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
106.0 Add the following three sections: 
106.7 Violations. Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, who violates, 
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists or opposes the execution of any of 
the provisions of this code, shall be liable for a civil penalty, not to exceed $500 for each day 
such violation is committed or permitted to continue, which penalty shall be assessed and 
recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people of the City and County of San 
Francisco by the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any penalty assessed and 
recovered in an action brought pursuant to this paragraph shall be paid to the City Treasurer and 
credited to the Department of Building Inspection’s Special Fund. 
106.8 Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, who violates, disobeys, omits, 
neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the execution of any of the 
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be 
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both 
such fine and imprisonment, unless otherwise provided in this code, and shall be deemed guilty 
of a separate offense for every day such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal 
shall continue. Any person who shall do any work in violation of any of the provisions of this 
code, and any person having charge of such work who shall permit it to be done, shall be liable 
for the penalty provided. 
106.9 It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the posting of any notice provided for 
in this code, or to tear down or mutilate any such notice so posted by the Department of Building 
Inspection. 
SECTION 107.0 – BOARD OF APPEALS 
107.0 Replace this title and entire section as follows: 
107.0 [ ← ]  Board of Examiners. Applicants may appeal decisions made by the Department of 
Building Inspection to the Board of Examiners regarding approval of alternate materials, 
methods and types of construction and for variances from the provisions of this code. See 
Building Code Section 105A.1. 
 
Chapter 2 
DEFINITIONS 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
 
 

--- Page 5 ---
Page 5 
 
Chapter 3 
GENERAL REGULATIONS 
SECTION 302.2 - ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS 
OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIVALENCY 
302.2.2 Add the following section: 
302.2.2 Fees. See Building Code Section 110A, Table 1A-J Miscellaneous Fees for applicable 
fees. 
 
Chapter 4 
VENTILATION AIR 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 5 
EXHAUST SYSTEMS 
SECTION 504.3 – DOMESTIC COOKING EXHAUST 
EQUIPMENT 
504.3 Add the following sentence as item number (7) to the list: 
  
(7) Provide exhaust hood above kitchen range, stove or cooktop. Exhaust duct shall terminate to 
the exterior per California Mechanical Code Section 502.2.1 
 
 
Chapter 6 
DUCT SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 7 
COMBUSTION AIR 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 

--- Page 6 ---
Page 6 
 
Chapter 8 
CHIMNEYS AND VENTS 
SECTION 802.2 – CONNECTION TO VENTING SYSTEMS 
802.2.6 Revise this section as follows: 
802.2.6 Direct-Vent Appliances. Listed direct-vent appliances shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and Section 802.8.2. [NFPA 54:12.3.5], 
provided the installation does not violate existing State or Local ordinance and does not create a 
nuisance as defined within this code and section 216.0 of the San Francisco Plumbing Code. 
SECTION 802.6 – GAS VENTS 
802.6.1 Revise the heading and first sentence of this section as follows: 
802.6.1 Additional Termination Requirements. A gas vent shall terminate at least four (4) feet 
(1219 mm) from a property line, except a public way and in accordance with one of the 
following: 
SECTION 802.8 – THROUGH-THE-WALL VENT 
TERMINATIONS 
802.8 Revise the first sentence of this section and add an exception (3) to this section as follows:  
802.8 Through-the-Wall Vent Termination. A mechanical draft venting system shall terminate 
at least four (4) feet (1219 mm) from a property line, except a public way and not less than 3 feet 
(914 mm) above any forced air inlet located within 10 feet (3048 mm). (See Figure 802.8) 
Exceptions: 
   (1)   This provision shall not apply to the combustion-air intake of a direct-vent appliance. 
   (2)   This provision shall not apply to the separation of the integral outdoor-air inlet and flue 
gas discharge of listed outdoor appliances. [NFPA 54:12.9.1] 
   (3)   Direct-vent appliances shall comply with sections 802.2.6 and 802.8.2 
 
Chapter 9 
INSTALLATION OF SPECIFIC APPLIANCES 
SECTION 924.1 – INCINERATORS AND CREMATORIES 
924.1 Add the following sentence as a second paragraph: 
   The operation and installation of incinerators shall also comply with the regulations of the Bay 
Area Air Quality Management District. 
SECTION 1013.0 – INSPECTIONS AND TESTS 
1013.1 Revise this section as follows: 
1013.1 General. An installation for which a permit is required shall not be put into service until 
it has been [ ← ] certified by a licensed boiler contractor or inspected by an approved insuring 
company inspector and an operating permit has been issued. 
   It shall be the duty of the owner or his authorized representative to notify the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction that the installation [ ← ] has been certified or inspected. It also shall be the duty of 
the owner or his authorized representative to post in a conspicuous position on the installation a 
notice in substantially the following form: “Warning! This installation has not been inspected 

--- Page 7 ---
Page 7 
 
and approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction and shall not be covered or concealed until so 
inspected and approved,” and it shall be unlawful for anyone other than the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction to remove such notice. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall require such tests as 
it deems necessary to determine that the installation [ ← ] complies with the provision of this 
section. Such tests shall be made by the owner or his authorized representative in the presence of 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Exception: On installations designed and supervised by a registered professional engineer, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to permit inspection and testing by such 
registered design professional. 
1013.2 Revise this section as follows: 
1013.2 Operating Permit. 
   It shall be unlawful to operate a boiler or pressure vessel without first obtaining a valid 
operating permit to do so from the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Such permit shall be displayed 
in a conspicuous place adjacent to the boiler or pressure vessel. The operating permit shall not be 
issued until the equipment has been [ ← ] certified as complying with State of California 
Building Safety Orders by a licensed boiler contractor, by employees of an approved insuring 
company holding commissions from the National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors 
or by a registered professional engineer. 
Exception: The operation of steam-heating boilers, low-pressure hot-water-heating boilers, hot 
water supply boilers, and pressure vessels in residential occupancies of less than six dwelling 
units and utility occupancies. 
1013.3 Revise this section as follows: 
1013.3 Maintenance Inspection. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall [ ← ] require an 
inspection of boilers and pressure vessels operated under permit in accordance with 
ASHRAE/ACCA 180 at such intervals as deemed necessary, but not less frequently than in 
accordance with Section 1013.4 through Section 1013.7. 
1013.7 Revise the second paragraph as follows: 
   Inspection of boilers and pressure vessels may be made by licensed C-4 Boiler Contractors 
and, when covered by insurance shall be permitted to be made by employees of the insuring 
company holding commissions from the National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Inspectors, subject to approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Approved insuring company 
inspectors shall make reports on prescribed forms on inspections authorized by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. The reports shall be filed in the Authority Having Jurisdiction office. 
Company inspectors shall notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction of suspension of insurance 
because of dangerous conditions, new insurance in effect, and discontinuance of insurance 
coverage, or any unsafe conditions requiring correction. 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 8 ---
Page 8 
 
Chapter 11 
REFRIGERATION 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 12 
HYDRONICS 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 13 
FUEL GAS PIPING 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
Chapter 14 
PROCESS PIPING 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 15 
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 16 
STATIONARY POWER PLANTS 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 17 
REFERENCED STANDARDS 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 

--- Page 9 ---
Page 9 
 
 
Appendix B 
PROCEDURES TO BE FOLLOWED TO PLACE 
GAS EQUIPMENT IN OPERATION 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix C 
INSTALLATION AND TESTING OF OIL (LIQUID) 
FUEL-FIRED EQUIPMENT 
No San Francisco Mechanical Code Amendments. 
 
 
Note: Appendices A, D, E, F and G not adopted by CMC. 
 