--- Page 1 ---
 
 
2025 
San Francisco Building Code 
 
Amendments to the 
 
2025 California Building Code, Title 24, Part 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operative date: January 1, 2026 
  

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
2025 
San Francisco Residential Code 
 
Amendments to the 
 
2025 California Residential Code, Title 24, Part 2.5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operative date: January 1, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 2025 California Residential Code (CRC) as amended by the City & County of San 
Francisco is herein printed as Chapter 36 of the San Francisco Building Code which serves 
as a directory of where such provisions may be found in the other chapters of the San 
Francisco Building Code. Provisions of the California Residential Code have been relocated 
as amendments to the 2025 California Building Code under the specific applicable sections 
and are noted and referenced to the CRC. 

--- Page 3 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Text Format: 
   Explanatory remarks are boxed and italicized. 
   Unchanged language from the 2025 California Codes is shaded, and may include bold and/or 
italicized formatting. 
   San Francisco amendments are printed in unformatted ("plain") text, and may include bold 
and/or italicized formatting. 
   Repealed San Francisco amendments appear in plain and strikeout. 
   New San Francisco amendments appear underlined. 
Marginal Markings: 
[ ← ]   An arrow represents the location of language that has been deleted by San Francisco from 
the 2025 California Code. 
 
  
PROPOSED SAN FRANCISCO 
BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS 
 
2025 Edition  

--- Page 4 ---
2 
 
 
Chapter 1 
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
Division I 
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 
   No San Francisco Building Code Amendments. 
Division II 
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
   See Chapter 1A for the Administration provisions of the San Francisco Building Code. 
Add chapter as follows: 
Chapter 1A 
SAN FRANCISCO ADMINISTRATION 
   The City and County of San Francisco adopts the following Chapter 1A for the purpose of 
administration of the 2022 2025 San Francisco Building Code. Certain specific administrative 
and general code provisions as adopted by various state agencies may be found in Chapter 1, 
Divisions I and II of this code. 
SECTION 101A – TITLE, SCOPE AND GENERAL 
101A.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the “2022 2025 San Francisco Building 
Code,” may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.” The 2022 2025 San 
Francisco Building Code amends the 2022 2025 California Building Code and the 2022 2025  
California Residential Code which is Part 2 & 2.5 respectively of the 12 parts of the official 
compilation and publication of the adoption amendment and repeal of the building regulations to 
the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, also referred to as the California Building Standards 
Code. The California Building Code and California Residential Code incorporates by adoption 
the 2021 2024 International Building Code and 2021 2024 International Residential Code 
respectively of the International Code Council with necessary California amendments. 
101A.2 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to 
safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of 
egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities, sanitation, adequate lighting and 
ventilation and energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards 
attributed to the built environment; to regulate and control the demolition of all buildings and 
structures, and the quarrying, grading, excavation, and filling of land; and to provide safety to 
fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 

--- Page 5 ---
3 
   The further purpose of this code is to ensure that barrier-free design is incorporated in all 
buildings, facilities, site work and other developments to which this code applies and to ensure 
that they are accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities. 
101A.3 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, 
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal 
and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such 
buildings or structures. 
101A.3.1 Non-state-regulated buildings, structures and applications. Except as modified by 
local ordinance pursuant to Section 1.1.8, the following standards in the California Code of 
Regulations, Title 24, Parts 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 shall apply to all occupancies 
and applications not regulated by a state agency. 
101A.4 Effective Date of this code. 
101A.4.1 Only those standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission and 
code amendments, additions or deletions adopted by the City and County of San Francisco that 
are effective at the time an application for building permit is deemed acceptable for building plan 
review by the Department of Building Inspection shall apply to the plans and specifications for, 
and to the construction performed under, that permit. For the effective dates of the provisions 
contained in this code, see History Notes page of this code. 
101A.4.2 Appendices. Provisions contained in the appendices of this code shall not apply unless 
specifically adopted by a state agency or adopted by a local enforcing agency in compliance with 
Health and Safety Code Section 18901 et seq. for Building Standards Law, Health and Safety 
Code Section 17950 for State Housing Law and Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7 for Fire 
Protection Districts. 
101A.5 Validity. If any chapter section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for 
any reason held to be unconstitutional, contrary to statute, exceeding the authority of the state as 
stipulated by statutes, or otherwise inoperative, such decision shall not affect the validity of the 
remaining portion of this code. 
101A.6 Reference Documents. The codes, standards and publications adopted and set forth in 
this code, including other codes, standards and publications referred to therein are, by title and 
date of publication, hereby adopted as standard reference documents of this code. 
   When this code does not specifically cover any subject relating to building design and 
construction, recognized architectural or engineering practices shall be employed. The National 
Fire Codes and Fire Protection Handbook of the National Fire Protection Association are 
permitted to be used as authoritative guides in determining recognized fire-prevention 
engineering practices. 
   In the event of any differences between these building standards and the standard reference 
documents, the text of these building standards shall govern. 
101A.7 Order of Precedence. 
101A.7.1 Specific provisions. Where a specific provision varies from a general provision, the 
specific provision shall apply. 
101A.7.2 Conflicts. When the requirements of this code conflict with the requirements of any 
other part of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, any provision contained 
elsewhere in the San Francisco Municipal Code, or any regulation or requirement adopted by the 
Public Utilities Commission or other City agency under its Charter authority, the most restrictive 
requirement shall prevail. 

--- Page 6 ---
4 
101A.7.3 Fire codes. Nothing in these building standards shall diminish the requirements of the 
state fire marshal. 
Sections 101A.8 – 101A.19 are reserved. 
101A.20 Central Permit Bureau. A Central Permit Bureau is hereby established in the 
Department of Building Inspection. The Central Permit Bureau shall process applications for 
permits required in Section 106A.1 of this code and for certain other permits required by 
ordinance or regulation for other departments and bureaus of the City and County of San 
Francisco. Permit processing procedures are detailed in an Administrative Bulletin issued by the 
Building Official in cooperation with other departments and bureaus. The Central Permit Bureau 
shall arrange for the review of permit applications, the issuance of permits and the collection 
of fees as fixed by law. 
   The fees collected by the Central Permit Bureau shall be credited to the account of the 
department or bureau authorized by ordinance or Charter to approve such permits. The 
Controller, in conjunction with the Central Permit Bureau and the concerned departments and 
bureaus, shall analyze the cost to the City and County of San Francisco of regulation and 
inspection required by each such class of permit and shall propose the rates to be fixed therefor 
by ordinance, which shall not be less than the cost to the City and County of San Francisco of 
such regulation and inspection. 
101A.21 Safety Assessment Placards. This section establishes standard placards to be used to 
indicate the condition of a building or structure after a natural or human-created disaster. A 
description of the placards to be used is set forth in this Section. The Building Official and their 
authorized representatives are authorized to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a 
building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. A safety assessment is a visual, 
nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the 
condition for continued occupancy. 
101A.21.1 Application of provisions. The provisions of this section are applicable to all 
buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City and County of San Francisco. 
101A.21.2 Description of placards. The Department of Building Inspection shall use the form 
of standard placards that the Applied Technology Council has recommended and revises from 
time to time. The actual placards shall be in a form that the Building Official approves. In 
addition, the ordinance number, the name of the department, its address, and phone number shall 
be permanently affixed to each placard. In addition, each placard shall include the following 
language or its equivalent as determined by the Building Official: Any unauthorized removal, 
alteration, or covering of this placard shall be considered a violation of the San Francisco 
Building Code and the responsible person(s) shall be subject to applicable penalties set forth in 
the code. A general description of the placards is as follows: 
   1.   INSPECTED – LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED. This placard is to be posted 
on any building or structure where no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is 
not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
   2.   RESTRICTED USE. This placard is to be posted on each building or structure that is 
damaged to such an extent that restrictions on continued occupancy are required. The person or 
persons authorized to post this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered 
and will note with specificity any restrictions on continued occupancy. 
   3.   UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY. This placard is to be posted on each 
building or structure that is damaged to such an extent that continued occupancy poses a threat to 
life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any 

--- Page 7 ---
5 
circumstance except as authorized in writing by the Building Official of Building Inspection or 
his or her authorized representative. Authorized safety assessment individuals or teams may 
enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered to be a demolition 
order. The person or persons authorized to post this placard will note in general terms the type of 
damage encountered. 
101A.21.3 Removal or alteration prohibited. Once it has been attached to a building or 
structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered, or covered except by an authorized 
representative of the Department or upon written notification from the Department. Any 
unauthorized removal, alteration, or covering of a placard shall be considered a violation of this 
code and the responsible person(s) shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein. 
 
SECTION 102A – UNSAFE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR 
PROPERTY 
   All buildings, structures, property, or parts thereof, regulated by this code that are structurally 
unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise 
dangerous to human life, safety, or health of the occupants or the occupants of adjacent 
properties or the public by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or 
abandonment, or by reason of occupancy or use in violation of law or ordinance, or were erected, 
moved, altered, constructed or maintained in violation of law or ordinance are, for the purpose of 
this chapter, unsafe. 
   Whenever the Building Official determines by inspection that property or properties either 
improved or unimproved are unstable because of landslide, subsidence or inundation or that such 
occurrences are deemed imminent as described above, the Building Official shall give written 
notice to the owner or owners that said property or properties are unsafe. The notice shall specify 
the conditions creating the unsafe classification. 
   All such unsafe buildings, structures, property, or portions thereof, are hereby declared to be 
public nuisances and shall be vacated, repaired, altered or demolished as hereinafter provided. 
102A.1 Fire Hazard. No person, including but not limited to the state and its political 
subdivisions, operating any occupancy subject to these regulations shall permit any fire hazard, 
as defined in this section, to exist on premises under their control, or fail to take immediate 
action to abate a fire hazard when requested to do so by the enforcing agency. 
   Note: “Fire hazard” as used in these regulations means any condition, arrangement or act 
which will increase, or may cause an increase of, the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree 
than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service of preventing, 
suppressing or extinguishing fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder, or may become the 
cause of obstruction, delay or hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire. 
102A.2 Authority to Enforce. Subject to other provisions of law, for administration, 
enforcement, actions, proceedings, abatement, violations and penalties in structures subject to 
State Housing Law, refer to Health and Safety Code Sections 17910 through 17995.5 and 
California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1. 
102A.2.1 Mobilehome parks and special occupancy parks. Subject to other provisions of law, 
for administrative, enforcement, actions, proceedings, abatement, inspections and penalties 
applicable to the Mobilehome Parks Act, refer to California Health and Safety Code, 
commencing with Section 18200 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 2. 

--- Page 8 ---
6 
102A.2.2 Employee Housing. Subject to other provisions of law, for administrative, 
enforcement, actions, proceedings, violations and penalties applicable to the Employee Housing 
Act, refer to Safety Code, Sections 17000 through 17062.5 and California Code of Regulations, 
Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3. 
102A.3 Inspections. The Building Official may inspect or cause the inspection of any building, 
structure or property for the purpose of determining whether it is unsafe whenever: 
   (a)   The Building Official, with reasonable discretion, determines that such inspection is 
necessary or desirable; or, 
   (b)   Any person or any agency or department of the City submits to the Building Official a 
complaint which, in the Building Official’s opinion, establishes reasonable cause to believe that 
the building, structure or property or any portion thereof is unsafe. 
102A.3.1 Dwelling Units constructed or installed without required permit(s). In the case of 
an unauthorized Dwelling Unit constructed or installed in an existing building without the 
required permit or permits, in addition to the above requirements the written notice of violation 
shall order the property owner to file an application for a building and other permits required to 
legalize the unit pursuant to Building Code Section 106A.3.1.3 and Planning Code 
Section 207.3. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
   1.   Removal of the unit has been approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Planning 
Code Section 317; or 
   2.   After performing a screening under Section 106A.3.1.3(a) of this Code, the Department has 
determined that the unauthorized Dwelling Unit is not able to be legalized under 
Section 106A.3.1.3 of this Code; or 
   3.   The Building Official has determined that a serious and imminent hazard under 
Section 102A.16 of this Code exists on the subject property. 
   Upon submission of an application for legalization or removal of an unauthorized Dwelling 
Unit by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, the Department will suspend a notice of 
violation issued pursuant to this Section 102A.3.1 pending a decision on the application unless 
the Building Official has determined that a serious and imminent hazard exists on the property. If 
approval of either legalization or removal of the unauthorized Dwelling Unit occurs within one 
year of issuance of the notice of violation, the notice of violation and any liens recorded against 
the property with respect to the violation will be rescinded. The Building Official may extend 
this time if a delay in obtaining approval is not the fault of the property owner. 
102A.4 Notice of Municipal Code Violation. 
   (a)   When the Building Official observes or otherwise determines any condition which renders 
the building, structure or property unsafe, the Building Official shall, within 15 days, serve a 
Notice of Municipal Code Violation (“NOV”) upon the building owner. The Building Official 
shall not issue successive NOVs for the same violation or violations as a means of extending the 
filing time or the enforcement process or as a means of following up with the building owner. 
   (b)   The NOV shall identify each violation observed or otherwise established, including the 
violations which render the building, structure or property unsafe, and shall state a deadline for 
the building owner to abate the violations and a date for reinspection. The NOV shall also set 
forth the penalties, fees and costs as prescribed in Sections 102A.7(d) and 103A of this code. The 
NOV shall be a public record subject to disclosure pursuant to Administrative Code Chapter 67. 
   (c)   The Building Official shall mail a copy of the NOV to the building owner by first class 
mail at the address listed with the Assessor-Recorder’s Office. The Building Official shall post 

--- Page 9 ---
7 
the NOV in a conspicuous place on the subject property and make a copy of the NOV available 
to each tenant of the subject property. 
102A.5 Notice of Administrative Hearing. 
   (a)   If the Building Official determines that the building owner has not corrected the code 
violations by the deadline provided in the NOV, the Building Official shall schedule an 
administrative hearing on the violations, to be heard within 60 days of the deadline, unless the 
building owner demonstrates to the Building Official’s satisfaction that the building owner has 
made substantial progress in abating the violations. 
   (b)   The Building Official shall issue a Notice of Administrative Hearing (“Hearing Notice”) 
to the building owner. The Hearing Notice shall state the date, hour and place of the hearing and 
contain a conspicuous warning setting forth the penalties, fees and costs prescribed in 
Sections 102A.7(d) and 103A of this Code. The Hearing Notice shall include a copy of the NOV. 
The Hearing Notice shall inform all interested parties who desire to be heard in the matter that 
they may appear to show cause why the property, building or structure, or portion thereof, should 
not be ordered repaired, altered, vacated and repaired or altered, or vacated and demolished. 
   (c)   The Building Official shall serve the Hearing Notice on the building owner by certified 
mail to the building owner at the address listed with the Assessor-Recorder’s Office and shall 
post the NOV in a conspicuous place on the subject property. The Building Official shall mail 
the Hearing Notice on the building owner at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
   (d)   In addition to serving the NOV on the building owner, the Building Official shall send a 
copy of the NOV by certified mail to: 
      (1)   The person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved; 
      (2)   The holder of any mortgage, deed of trust, lien or encumbrance of record; 
      (3)   The owner or holder of any lease of record; and, 
      (4)   The record holder of any other estate or interest in the building, structure or property, or 
the land upon which it is located. 
      The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner 
the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
   (e)   The person serving the Hearing Notice shall complete a declaration under penalty of 
perjury, certifying the date and manner in which such Hearing Notice was given, and the 
Building Official shall retain the certified mail receipt card, if any, for the Hearing Notice. 
   (f)   In addition to the Hearing Notice, the Building Official shall provide the building owner 
with an information sheet regarding the enforcement process, the building owner’s rights and 
duties prior to the hearing, and the information the building owner must bring to the hearing. 
102A.6 Conduct of Administrative Hearing. 
   (a)   The Building Official shall conduct the Administrative Hearing, or may designate a 
Hearing Officer who shall have the same authority as the Building Official to hear and decide the 
case and to make any orders consistent with this Code. For purposes of Sections 102A.6 
through 102A.7, “Hearing Officer” shall include the Building Official if the Building Official 
conducts the Administrative Hearing. The Hearing Officer shall not be the same individual who 
signed the NOV. 
   (b)   The Hearing Officer shall hold the Administrative Hearing at the time and place 
designated in the Hearing Notice. The Hearing Officer may, in his or her discretion and for good 
cause shown, continue the hearing one time, for a period not to exceed 30 days. All persons 
having an interest in the building, structure or property or having knowledge of facts material to 
the allegations of the NOV, including the list of code violations, may present evidence for 

--- Page 10 ---
8 
consideration by the Hearing Officer, subject to any rules adopted by the Hearing Officer for the 
orderly conduct of the hearing. 
102A.7 Administrative Order. 
   (a)   Within 30 days following the conclusion of the Administrative Hearing, the Hearing 
Officer shall issue a written decision (“Administrative Order”). 
   (b)   The Administrative Order shall state in reasonable detail which conditions render the 
building, structure, or property, or portion thereof, unsafe, and shall state the work required to be 
done to satisfy the Administrative Order. The Administrative Order shall include a copy of the 
NOV. The Administrative Order may direct the building owner to repair, alter, vacate, and/or 
demolish the subject property. 
   (c)   The Administrative Order shall specify the time within which the building owner shall 
repair, alter, vacate, and/or demolish the building, structure, or property, or portion thereof, or 
otherwise comply with the Order. The time for compliance with the Administrative Order shall 
not to exceed1 180 days from permit issuance. The Hearing Officer may, in his or her discretion 
and for good cause shown, extend the time for compliance with the Administrative Order once, 
for a period limited to the minimum time necessary for completion and not to exceed 90 days, 
following a written request by the building owner. 
   (d)   In addition to any monetary penalties authorized in Section 103A, the Department shall be 
entitled to its costs of preparation for and appearance at the Administrative Hearing, and all prior 
and subsequent attendant and administrative costs, and the Department shall assess these costs 
upon the building owner monthly, at the rates set under Section 110A, Tables 1A-D (Standard 
Hourly Rates) and 1A-K (Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments), until the costs 
are paid in full. In addition, the Department shall be entitled to its attorneys fees and costs, 
including but not limited to expert witness fees, incurred in bringing the administrative 
enforcement action. The violations cited in the Administrative Order will not be deemed legally 
abated until the building owner makes full payment of the penalties and costs, and failure to pay 
the assessment of costs shall result in tax lien proceedings against the property. 
   (e)   The Hearing Officer shall serve the Administrative Order on the building owner in the 
same manner as the Hearing Notice. The Building Official shall record a copy of the 
Administrative Order in the Assessor-Recorder’s Office. When the Building Official determines 
that the work required under the Administrative Order has been completed and the building, 
structure, or property, or portion thereof, no longer is unsafe, the Building Official shall issue 
and record a rescission of the Administrative Order with the Assessor-Recorder’s Office. 
   (f)   Any person may appeal an Administrative Order pursuant to Section 105A.2. The Hearing 
Officer shall inform the building owner, at the Administrative Hearing and in the Administrative 
Order, of the right of appeal to the Abatement Appeals Board provided that the appeal is made in 
writing and filed with the Secretary of the Abatement Appeals Board within 15 days after the 
Order is posted and served. The 15-day limitation shall not apply when any type of a moratorium 
authorized in Section 105A.2 is sought. Where construction materials, methods, types of 
construction, or compliance with the time limits set forth in Table No. 16B-A5B-A of the 
Existing Building Code are the bases, in whole or in part, of the Building Official’s finding that 
an unreinforced masonry building, or portion thereof, is unsafe, the Abatement Appeals Board 
shall refer these matters to the Board of Examiners established in Section 105A.1 of this Code. 
Where construction materials, methods, and types of construction are the bases, in whole or in 
part, of the Building Official’s finding that the building, or structure, or portion thereof, is 
unsafe, the Abatement Appeals Board shall refer these matters to the Board of Examiners for its 

--- Page 11 ---
9 
examination and determination with respect to such materials, methods, and types of 
construction. The Board of Examiners shall approve or disapprove such materials, methods, and 
types of construction, and may attach conditions to its approval, and shall forward a copy of its 
report to the Abatement Appeals Board. The Abatement Appeals Board shall include in its 
decision the findings of the Board of Examiners. 
102A.8 Remedies are Non-Exclusive. Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 102A.4 
through 102A.7, the City Attorney may institute civil proceedings for injunctive and monetary 
relief, including civil penalties, against a building owner for violations of the Municipal Code 
under any circumstances, without regard to whether a complaint has been filed or the Building 
Official has issued a NOV or an Administrative Order. In any civil action filed by the City 
Attorney under this Section 102A.8, the City, when it is the prevailing party, shall be awarded 
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs, including but not limited to expert witness fees and costs of 
investigation incurred in bringing the proceedings. 
Editor’s Note: 
   Sections 102A.9 and 102A.10 are reserved. 
102A.11 Violation – Penalties for Disregarding Order. 
102A.11.1 Failure to comply. The owner of any building, structure, or property or portion 
thereof determined by the Building Official to be unsafe who has failed to comply with any order 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 103A. 
102A.11.2 Failure to vacate. The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with the 
order to vacate said building or portion thereof in accordance with any order given as provided 
for hereinabove shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 103A. 
102A.11.3 Removal of notice. Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required 
in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 103A. 
102A.12 Costs of Abatement by the City and County of San Francisco. Whenever the 
Building Official, pursuant to authority conferred by this code, causes a building, structure, or 
property, or portion thereof, to be barricaded, secured, repaired or altered, demolished, or have 
other actions taken by the Department or its contractor to remedy an unsafe condition, the cost 
thereof shall be paid from the Repair and Demolition Fund and assessed against said property. 
102A.13 Repair and Demolition Fund. A special revolving fund, established by Section 
10.100-45 of the Administrative Code, the Repair and Demolition Fund, may be used for the 
purpose of defraying the costs and expenses (including Department administrative costs) which 
may be incurred by the Building Official in carrying out the actions described in 
Section 102A.12. 
   The Board of Supervisors may, by transfer or by appropriation, establish or increase the special 
revolving fund with such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of 
the work of securing, repairing, altering or demolition. The Repair and Demolition Fund shall be 
replenished with all funds collected under the proceedings hereinafter provided for, either upon 
voluntary payments or as the result of the sale of the property after delinquency, or otherwise. 
Balances remaining in the Repair and Demolition Fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be 
carried forward in such fund. 
102A.14 Failure to Comply with Order. Whenever an order to repair, alter, vacate and alter or 
repair, or vacate and demolish any building, structure or property, or portion thereof, has not 
been complied with within the time set by the Building Official, or within such additional time as 
the Building Official may for good cause extend, or within the time fixed by the Abatement 

--- Page 12 ---
10 
Appeals Board, the Building Official shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy 
provided herein or by law or any other ordinance, to: 
   1.   Cause the building, structure, property, or portion thereof, to be vacated, barricaded, or 
otherwise secured against use or occupancy pending the correction of all conditions ordered to be 
corrected, or pending demolition; or 
   2.   Cause the building, structure, property, or portion thereof, to be dismantled or demolished 
and the site cleared by such means as the Building Official shall deem advisable; or 
   3.   Cause the building, structure, property, or portion thereof, to be repaired or altered, so as to 
render it safe and in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, by such means as the 
Building Official shall deem advisable. 
   Any work done pursuant to the authority herein shall be performed in accordance with the 
limitations as to repair expenditure as contained in Section 102A.16 and with the established 
practices applicable to the Department. 
102A.15 Forfeiture of Owner’s Right to Do Work. Whenever, pursuant to Section 102A.14, 
the Building Official intends to cause to be done any of the work described therein, the Building 
Official shall provide notice in the manner set forth in Section 102A.4, of the Building Official’s 
intention to do such work, and shall specify a date certain upon which the Building Official shall 
solicit bids to accomplish the necessary work, which shall be not sooner than 10 days from the 
date such notice is given. From and after said date certain the owner and every other person 
having charge or control over said building, structure or property shall be deemed to have 
forfeited all right to do such work and is thereafter prohibited from doing any such work except 
as the Building Official may allow. 
102A.16 Serious and Imminent Hazards – Emergency Orders. Notwithstanding any other 
provisions of this chapter, whenever, in the judgment of the Building Official, it appears from an 
inspection or notice of violation that there exists in, on, or near any building, structure, property, 
or portion thereof, any condition constituting an imminent and substantial hazard to the life, 
health or safety of the occupants or other persons, or to such building, structure, or property 
requiring prompt action to correct said condition, the Building Official shall have the power to 
issue an order in writing detailing the serious and imminent hazard conditions and requiring: 
   1.   That the building, structure, property, or portion thereof, be vacated and thereafter be kept 
vacant until the Building Official gives written permission that the same may be reoccupied, 
without giving the notice and holding the hearing prescribed in Sections 102A.4 through 102A.6, 
whenever, by reason of serious and imminent danger, prompt vacating of the premises, building, 
structure or property, or a portion thereof, appears necessary in the judgment of the Building 
Official; 
   2.   That the building, structure, property, or a portion thereof, be barricaded, boarded up, or 
otherwise secured against entry, occupancy or use by all persons, except as permitted by said 
order; 
   3.   That the building, structure, property, or a portion thereof, be demolished or that serious 
and imminent hazard conditions be repaired, altered, corrected or eliminated in accordance with 
the particulars set forth in the order. 
   The order shall contain time frames required for compliance with the order and shall set forth 
the street address of the building or structure and a description of the building, structure, or 
property sufficient for identification. 
   In such cases of serious and imminent hazard, the order may be issued by the Building Official 
without giving the notice and holding the hearing specified in Sections 102A.4 through 102A.6. 

--- Page 13 ---
11 
A copy of said order shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the building, structure, or 
property, a copy shall be served in the manner prescribed in Section 102A.4, and a copy shall be 
recorded in the Assessor-Recorder’s Office. 
   The Building Official shall have the further power under this section to cause or compel the 
work required under the order to be undertaken by such means as the Building Official may 
deem advisable if the owner and all other persons having an interest in the building, structure, or 
property have failed, for a period of not more than 48 hours after the posting and service of the 
order, to comply with the order. 
   Whenever the Building Official orders that repairs or alterations be made pursuant to this 
Section, the authority of the Building Official to repair or alter, or cause repairs or alterations to 
be made to comply with the order, shall be limited to repairs or alterations whose cost does not 
exceed 50 percent of the value, as defined by the Assessor, of the building, structure, property, or 
portion thereof. 
102A.16.1 Continuing or Recurring Conditions Creating a Fire Hazard in a Residential 
Building of Three or More Dwelling Units; Authority of the Building Official. In addition to 
any other power or remedy available under this Code or other applicable laws, the Building 
Official may issue a Fire Life Safety Notice and Order pursuant to the provisions of this 
Section 102A.16.1 and Sections 102A.16.1.1 and 102A.16.1.2 that requires the owner of a 
residential building with three or more dwelling units to install, improve, or upgrade the 
building’s fire safety systems. 
102A.16.1.1 Fire Life Safety Notice and Order. The Building Official may issue a Fire Life 
Safety Notice and Order in cases where the Building Official has determined that: 
   (a)   notwithstanding the Department’s issuance of two or more NOVs and Administrative 
Orders under Sections 102A.4 and 102A.7 of this Code for violation of the fire safety 
requirements enforced by the Department of Building Inspection, a fire hazard (as defined in 
Section 102A.1) continues to exist or recurs after abatement in a residential building with three 
or more dwelling units; and 
   (b)   while the cited code violations have not risen to the level of an imminent hazard that 
requires issuance of an emergency order under Section 102A.16, the violations are so extensive 
and of such a nature (including but not limited to conditions such as a nonworking fire alarm or 
sprinkler system, a nonworking or chronically blocked fire escape, or locked or chronically 
blocked exits or egress system) that the health and safety of the residents and/or the general 
public is substantially endangered; and 
   (c)   the property owner either has failed to abate or mitigate the violations in a timely way in 
accordance with an Administrative Order issued pursuant to Section 102A.7 of this Code, or the 
violations recur after abatement. 
102A.16.1.1.1 Legal Status of Previously Issued NOVs. A Fire Life Safety Notice and Order 
issued pursuant to Section 102A.16.1.1 is in lieu of a Notice of Municipal Code Violation 
(“NOV”) and an Administrative Order issued pursuant to Sections 102A.4 and 102A.7 of this 
Code. However, such an Order does not replace any NOVs that have previously been issued and 
remain unabated. Any previously-issued NOVs shall require abatement pursuant to their terms. 
102A.16.1.1.2 Required Provisions of a Fire Life Safety Notice and Order. The Fire Life 
Safety Notice and Order issued pursuant to Section 102A.16.1.1 shall require the building owner 
to do one or more of the following: 
   (a)   install a new fire sprinkler system; 
   (b)   improve an existing fire sprinkler system or upgrade it to current code requirements; 

--- Page 14 ---
12 
   (c)   install a new fire alarm and/or detection system; 
   (d)   improve an existing fire alarm and/or detection system or upgrade it to current code 
requirements. 
   Prior to ordering any such installation, improvement, or upgrade, the Building Official shall 
provide the notice required by Section 102A.16.1.1.3 below and consult with the local fire code 
official. The local fire official shall approve any installation, improvement, or upgrade ordered 
by the Building Official. 
102A.16.1.1.3 Warning Statements and Letter Prior to Issuance of Fire Life Safety Notice 
and Order. Each NOV or Administrative Order issued pursuant to Sections 102A.4 and 102A.7 
of this Code that includes a fire safety violation shall provide information about 
Section 102A.16.1 et seq. and the consequences for not abating fire safety violations within the 
specified compliance period. In addition, prior to issuance of a Fire Life Safety Notice and 
Order, the Building Official shall send a letter by regular and certified mail to the building owner 
at the address listed with the Assessor-Recorder’s Office and to the persons or entities listed in 
Section 102A.16.1.2(b) below informing them that because the building has been cited with two 
or more fire-safety related NOVs and Administrative Orders under Sections 102A.4 and 102A.7 
of this Code, the owner is a potential recipient of a Fire Life Safety Notice and Order. 
102A.16.1.2 Notice and Hearing Procedures. All the notice and hearing procedures set forth in 
Sections 102A.4 through 102A.7 shall apply to a Fire Life Safety Notice and Order, except as 
that procedure may be modified below. 
   (a)   The Fire Life Safety Notice and Order shall: 
      (1)   be signed by the Building Official; 
      (2)   set forth the street address of the building and a description of the building or property 
sufficient for identification; 
      (3)   identify each code violation that the Building Official has determined is a fire hazard 
substantially endangering the health and safety of the residents and/or the general public; 
      (4)   specify the fire safety installation, improvement, and/or upgrades required; and 
      (5)   contain time frames required for compliance with the Notice and Order. 
   (b)   The Building Official shall serve the Fire Life Safety Notice and Order by certified mail 
on the building owner(s) at the address listed with the Assessor-Recorder’s Office, and shall send 
a copy by certified mail to: 
      (1)   the person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the premises involved; 
      (2)   the holder of any mortgage, deed of trust, lien, or encumbrance of record; and 
      (3)   the owner or holder of any other estate or interest in the building or property, or the land 
on which it is located. 
   (c)   The Building Official shall post a copy of the Fire Life Safety Notice and Order in a 
conspicuous place on the subject property and either mail or deliver a copy to the resident(s) of 
each unit on the subject property. 
   (d)   Unless the building owner demonstrates to the Building Official’s satisfaction that the 
owner has made substantial progress in complying with the Fire Life Safety Notice and Order, if 
the building owner has not complied with said Notice and Order according to the required time 
frames the Building Official shall schedule an Administrative Hearing to be held no later than 14 
days after the compliance deadline. 
   (e)   If an Administrative Hearing is held, a designee of the Building Official shall attend the 
hearing, which shall be conducted by a designated Hearing Officer. A written decision signed by 
the Building Official shall be issued no later than 30 days after the hearing. 

--- Page 15 ---
13 
102A.16.1.3 Appeals. A Fire Life Safety Notice and Order may be appealed to the Abatement 
Appeals Board pursuant to the provisions of Section 105A.2 of this Code; provided, however, 
that 
   (a)   an appeal of a Fire Life Safety Notice and Order shall be scheduled for hearing within 14 
days after the date of filing the appeal, and 
   (b)   if the Abatement Appeals Board had heard an appeal of any previously-issued Order of 
Abatement pursuant to Section 102A for substantially the same code violations as are cited in the 
Fire Life Safety Notice and Order, and the Abatement Appeals Board had upheld the Order of 
Abatement in whole or substantial part, the decision of the Abatement Appeals Board shall be 
effective immediately upon issuance of the Board’s findings and decision with no right to request 
rehearing. 
102A.16.1.4 Recording of final Notice and Order; referral to City Attorney. Upon issuance 
of the Abatement Appeals Board decision, a copy of the final Fire Life Safety Notice and Order 
shall be recorded in the Assessor-Recorder’s Office. The Department shall refer the case to the 
City Attorney for its review and possible action within 90 days after recording said Notice and 
Order. 
102A.17 Assessment of Costs. The Building Official shall take action to have the costs of all 
work done or caused to be done pursuant to the provisions of Section 102A.14 or 
Section 102A.16 assessed against the parcel or parcels of land upon which said building, 
structure, property or portion thereof is situated. Such costs shall include, in addition to the cost 
of barricading, securing, repairing, or demolishing the building and the clearing of the site, the 
cost to the City and County of San Francisco of administration and supervision of such work. 
See Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments – for 
applicable rates. 
102A.18 Report of Costs, Notice of Hearing on Confirmation. 
102A.18.1 Preparation of delinquency report. If any penalty or assessment imposed pursuant 
to Section 102A is not received within the required time period, the Building Official shall 
initiate proceedings to make the penalty or assessment, plus accrued interest, a special 
assessment lien against the real property which is the subject of the penalty or assessment. The 
Building Official shall prepare a delinquency report for the Board of Supervisors. For each 
delinquent account, the report shall contain the owner’s name, the amount due, including 
interest, and a description of the real property. The report shall also indicate which of the 
delinquent accounts should be exempted from the lien procedure because of the small amounts 
involved, or because another debt collection procedure is more appropriate. The descriptions of 
the parcels shall be those used for the same parcels on the Recorder/Assessor’s Office records for 
the current year. 
102A.18.2 Notice. Five days prior to forwarding the delinquency report to the Board of 
Supervisors, the Building Official shall serve copies of the report in the manner prescribed in 
Section 102A.4 and shall post the report at the subject properties. Upon receipt of the report, the 
Board of Supervisors shall fix a time, date and place for hearing the report and any protests or 
objections thereto, and shall mail notice of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the date of 
hearing to each owner of real property described in the report. 
102A.19 Hearing and confirmation of report for special assessment of costs. 
102A.19.1 Hearing and confirmation. The Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing on the 
report along with protests or objections by the representatives of the real property liable to be 
assessed for such delinquent accounts. The Board of Supervisors may make such revisions, 

--- Page 16 ---
14 
corrections, or modifications of the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion or 
resolution, the report shall be confirmed. The Board of Supervisor’s decision on the report and 
on all protests or objections thereto shall be final and conclusive and shall constitute 
confirmation of the report; provided, however, that any delinquent account may be removed 
from the report by payment in full at any time prior to confirmation of the report. The Clerk of 
the Board of Supervisors shall cause the confirmed report to be verified in form sufficient to 
meet recording requirements. 
102A.19.2 Collection of assessment. Upon confirmation of the report by the Board of 
Supervisors, the delinquent charges contained therein shall constitute a special assessment 
against the property identified in the report. Each such assessment shall be subordinate to all 
existing special liens previously imposed upon such property and shall be paramount to all other 
liens except those for State, County and municipal taxes with which it shall be in parity. The lien 
shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid. All laws 
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to said 
special assessment. 
102A.19.3 Recordation charges. The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall cause the 
confirmed and verified report to be recorded in the Assessor-Recorder’s Office within 10 days of 
its confirmation. The special assessment lien on each parcel or property described in said report 
shall include additional charges for administrative expenses. See Section 110A, Table 1A-K – 
Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments – for Lien Recordation charges. 
102A.19.4 Filing with Controller and Tax Collector; distribution of proceeds. After the 
report is recorded, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall file a certified copy with the 
Controller and Tax Collector, whereupon it shall be the duty of said officers to add the amount of 
said special assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against said parcel or parcels, and 
thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary 
taxes are collected for the City and County of San Francisco, and shall be subject to the same 
penalties and the same procedures for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided 
for property taxes. 
102A.19.5 Release of lien, recording fee. Upon payment to the Tax Collector of the special 
assessment, the Tax Collector shall cause a release lien to be recorded with the Assessor-
Recorder’s Office, and from the sum collected pursuant to Section 102A.19.3 above, shall pay to 
the Assessor-Recorder’s Office the required recording fee. 
102A.20 Continuance of Gas and Electricity. In the event that electricity or gas service to a 
building, structure, property, or portion thereof is about to be discontinued by the utility 
company for nonpayment of bills, the Building Official, through the issuance of an Emergency 
Order, may order that the utility company continue said service to protect the life, health and 
safety of the occupants. Said order shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 102A.16 
of this code and shall remain in force for six months, unless otherwise specified by the Building 
Official. 
   The funds for the continuance of said services shall be provided from the Repair and 
Demolition Fund. Said costs and administrative costs incurred by the City and County of San 
Francisco shall be assessed against the parcel or parcels of land upon which said building, 
structure or property is situated. See Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code 
Enforcement Assessments – for applicable rate. 
   If payment is not received from the property owner within the required time period, a Report of 
Costs pursuant to Section 102A.18 shall be prepared for all such costs. Submittal, confirmation, 

--- Page 17 ---
15 
recordation and collection of the special assessment shall follow the procedures provided in 
Section 102A.19. 
   The provisions of Section 102A.20 shall only apply to buildings, structures, property, or 
portions thereof for which the owner, and not the tenant, is responsible for payment of said utility 
bills. 
 
SECTION 103A – VIOLATIONS 
SECTION 103A – VIOLATIONS 
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, 
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building, 
structure, property, or portions thereof or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this 
code. 
   (a)   Penalties. 
      (1)   Civil Penalties. Any person, the owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, who provides 
false information on permit applications or plans, or who otherwise violates, disobeys, omits, 
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or resists or opposes the execution of any of the provisions 
of this Code, shall be liable for a civil penalty, not less than $200, and not to exceed $1,000, for 
each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, which penalty shall be assessed 
and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the People of the City and County of San 
Francisco by the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any penalty assessed and 
recovered in an action brought pursuant to this subsection (a)(1) shall be paid to the City 
Treasurer and credited to the Department’s Special Fund. For purposes of this subsection (a)(1), 
each real property address, each commercial or dwelling unit within a multi-unit real property 
address affected by a violation, and each separate violation of the Building Code is a distinct 
violation for calculation of applicable civil penalties. 
      In assessing the amount of the civil penalty, the court shall consider any one or more of the 
relevant circumstances presented by any of the parties to the case, including but not limited to, 
the following: 
         (A)   the nature and seriousness of the misconduct, including but not limited to whether the 
violation resulted in any public health or safety hazard, or a dangerous condition on the affected 
property, and the impact of the violation on the occupants of the property and the surrounding 
neighborhood; 
         (B)   the number of violations; 
         (C)   the persistence of the misconduct; 
         (D)   the length of time over which the misconduct occurred; 
         (E)   the willfulness of the misconduct; 
         (F)   whether the violation of the Building Code resulted in the displacement of one or more 
tenants; 
         (G)   whether the violation is reversible; 
         (H)   the violator’s financial gain or opportunity for financial gain from the misconduct; 
and 
         (I)   the defendant’s assets, liabilities and net worth. 
      (2)   Criminal Penalties. Any person, the owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, who 
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the 


--- Page 18 ---
16 
execution of any of the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon 
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment not 
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, unless otherwise provided in this 
code, and shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day such violation, 
disobedience, omission, neglect, or refusal shall continue. Any person who shall do any work in 
violation of any of the provisions of this code, and any person having charge of such work who 
shall permit it to be done, shall be liable to the penalty provided. 
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the posting of any notice provided for in 
this code, or to tear down or mutilate any such notice posted by the Department. 
(Amended by Ord. 40-23 ,, File No. 220878, App. 3/28/2023, Eff. 4/28/2023) 
103A.1 Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13112, any person who violates any order, 
rule or regulation of the state fire marshal is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not 
less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not less than six months, or by 
both. A person is guilty of a separate offense each day during which he or she commits, 
continues or permits a violation of any provision of, or any order, rule or regulation of, the state 
fire marshal as contained in this code. 
   Any inspection authority who, in the exercise of his or her authority as a deputy state fire 
marshal, causes any legal complaints to be filed or any arrest to be made shall notify the state fire 
marshal immediately following such action. 
103A.2 Actions and proceedings. Subject to other provisions of law, California Code of 
Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1 commencing with Section 1 and Health and Safety 
Code, Sections 17980 through 17995.5 address punishments, penalties and fines for violations of 
building standards in structures subject to the State Housing Law. 
103A.2.1 Actions and proceedings. Subject to other provisions of law, California Code of 
Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2 commencing with Section 1000 and Health and 
Safety Code, Section 18700 addresses punishments, penalties and fines for violations of building 
standards subject to the Mobilehome Parks Act. 
103A.2.2 Actions and proceedings. Subject to other provisions of law, California Code of 
Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1 commencing with Section 600 and Health and 
Safety Code, Sections 17060 through 17062.5 address punishments, penalties and fines for 
violations of building standards subject to the Employee Housing Act. 
103A.3 Restrictions of unlawful residential demolition replacement. 
103A.3.1 Demolition without permit. Whenever the demolition of any building or structure 
takes place, including as defined in Section 317(b)(2)(B) or (C) but exclusive of the application 
of Section 317(b)(2)(D), without the issuance of a demolition permit as required by this code, the 
site on which the unlawful demolition occurred shall be subject to the following restriction: For 
five years from the date of the unlawful demolition, no permit authorizing the construction or 
alteration of any building or structure for that site shall be issued, except for a permit for the 
construction or alteration of a building or structure with the same or greater number of residential 
units, with the same or higher proportion of residential to nonresidential units, as the building or 
structure that was unlawfully demolished. In cases which qualify for the foregoing exception, the 
proposed area of all additional units must be at least 40% the gross square footage of the largest 
unit in the proposed project unless all units in the replacement project will be sold or rented at 
below market rates. All replacement Residential Units shall be subject to the Rent Ordinance 
(Administrative Code Chapter 37) to the same extent as the Residential Units that were 
demolished in violation of Section 317 of this Code. 
 

--- Page 19 ---
17 
103A.3.2 Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
   DEMOLITION means the total tearing down or destruction of a building containing one or 
more residential units, or any alteration which destroys or removes, as those terms are defined by 
the Building Official of the Department of Building Inspection, principal portions of an existing 
structure containing one or more residential units. 
   PRINCIPAL PORTION means that construction which determines the shape and size of the 
building envelope (such as the exterior walls, roof and interior bearing elements), or that 
construction which alters two-thirds or more of the interior elements (such as walls, partitions, 
floors or ceilings). 
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT means any dwelling unit, as defined in this code, or any guest room, as 
defined in the San Francisco Housing Code, other than the following: 
   1.   Any guest room in a building classified as a residential hotel pursuant to the Residential 
Hotel Unit Conversion and Demolition Ordinance. 
   2.   Any residential unit in a building where the demolition or alteration is required to comply 
with this code, the Housing Code or the City Planning Code. 
103A.3.3 Hearing. The Building Official shall hold a hearing within a reasonable period of time 
after discovering that an unlawful demolition may have taken place. The Building Official shall 
cause notice to be given to the owners of the affected property, and to the owners and occupants 
of property on the same block as the affected property’s site and across the street from the site 
for one block (that is, on lots which abut the same street as that which abuts the site to the nearest 
intersections on either side of the site), using the names and addresses of the owners as shown on 
the last assessment rolls of the City and County of San Francisco. For corner lots, notice shall be 
provided to the owners and occupants of property on the same block as the affected property’s 
site and for one block along both streets which the lot abuts (that is, on lots which abut the two 
streets which the site abuts to the nearest intersection on either side of the site) and, in addition, 
to the other corner lots at the intersection where the site is located. Notice may be given either by 
personal service or any mail, not less than 30 days before the scheduled date of the hearing. 
Immediately after giving such notice, the Building Official shall cause a copy of the notice, 
printed on a card of not less than 8 inches by 10 inches (203.2 mm × 254 mm), to be posted in a 
conspicuous place on the affected property. The notice shall specify the date and nature of the 
hearing and that the following issues will be determined at the hearing: whether an unlawful 
demolition has taken place as described in Sections 103A.3.1 and 103A.3.2, and, if so, the 
number of residential units that existed on the site, the proportion of residential to nonresidential 
units that existed on the site and the total square feet of the building or structure that existed on 
the site. Upon determination that an unlawful demolition has taken place, the Building Official 
shall promptly record a notice in the official records of the Recorder of the City and County of 
San Francisco; the recorded notice shall state that the property is subject to the restrictions set 
forth in Section 103A.3.1 of this code. 
   Upon determination that an unlawful demolition has taken place, the Building Official shall 
assess the owner all costs incurred by the City and County of San Francisco in detecting 
violations of this section and conducting the Building Official’s hearing by sending a notice of 
payment due to the property owner at the address shown on the City’s last assessment rolls. The 
notice shall list the costs incurred by the City in detecting violations of the ordinance and 
conducting the Building Official’s hearing, advise the owner that he or she is liable for these 
costs and advise the owner that payment to the City is due within 60 days of the mailing date of 
the notice. The notice shall also advise that, if payment of the costs is not received within 30 

--- Page 20 ---
18 
days of the due date, a lien may be imposed on the property pursuant to the report and 
confirmation procedure set forth in Sections 102A.18 and 102A.19 of this code. 
103A.3.4 Civil penalties. Any agent, contractor, or other person acting on behalf of the owner of 
a building or structure who causes or permits the demolition of the building or structure with the 
knowledge that a demolition permit has not been issued as required by this code shall be subject 
to a civil penalty of $10,000. 
103A.3.5 Penalties nonexclusive. The penalties set forth in this section 103A are not exclusive, 
but are in addition to any other penalties set forth in this code, in other San Francisco Municipal 
codes, or in state law. 
103A.4 Vacant or abandoned buildings – Annual registration; registration fee; 
maintenance and security requirements. 
103A.4.1 Definition. A building shall be defined as a vacant or abandoned if it (1) is unoccupied 
and unsecured; or (2) is unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or (3) is 
unoccupied and unsafe as defined in Section 102A of this Code; or (4) is unoccupied and has 
multiple code violations; or (5) has been unoccupied for over 30 days. A building which is 
partially unoccupied and has been cited for blight under Chapter 80 of the San Francisco 
Administrative Code, shall also be deemed a vacant or abandoned building that is subject to this 
Section. Commercial Storefronts, as defined in Section 103A.5.1 of this Code, located within 
vacant or abandoned buildings shall be subject to the enforcement provisions in 
Sections 103A.5-103A.5.6 of this Code. 
   For purposes of this Section 103A.4 a building shall not be considered vacant or abandoned if: 
   (1)   There is a valid building permit for repair, rehabilitation, or construction of a building on 
the parcel and the owner completes the repair, rehabilitation, or construction within one year 
from the date the initial permit was issued; or 
   (2)   The building complies with all codes, does not contribute to blight as defined in Chapter 
80 of the San Fran cisco Administrative Code, is ready for occupancy, and is actively being 
offered for sale, lease, or rent. 
   (3)   The building complies with all codes, does not contribute to blight as defined in Chapter 
80 of the San Francisco Administrative Code, and is undergoing a probate process that does not 
exceed two years. Upon expiration of the two-year period, the building shall become subject to 
the requirements of Section 103A.4. 
103A.4.2 Property owner’s obligation to register a vacant or abandoned building. The 
owner of a building defined as vacant or abandoned under Section 103A.4.1 shall register that 
building with the Department 30 days after it has become vacant or abandoned on a form 
provided by the Department. The form shall describe the methods by which the owner has 
secured the property against unauthorized entry, declare any future plans for the property, state 
whether or not there is fire and liability insurance coverage, and provide such other information 
as the Department may require. A registration fee shall be paid at the time of registration and 
annually thereafter. See Section 110A, Table 1A-J for applicable fee. 
103A.4.3 Notice. Whenever the Director has probable cause to believe, based upon an 
inspection, complaint, or report from another agency of the City and County of San Francisco or 
other governmental agency, that a building is vacant or abandoned and it has not been registered 
as required by this Section 103A.4, the Director shall serve the owner of record, as shown on the 
Assessor’s Records, or authorized agent with a written notice requiring the owner to register the 
building with the Department as vacant or abandoned and pay the registration fee within the 
period of time specified in the notice, which shall be no greater than 30 days. 

--- Page 21 ---
19 
103A.4.4 Sign posting. The owner of record of the vacant or abandoned building is required to 
post a sign at the front of the building, in a conspicuous location protected from the weather, that 
provides the current name, address, and phone number of the owner of record and authorized 
agent if different from the owner. If a notice of default or foreclosure has been recorded for the 
property, the lender’s name, address, and telephone number must also be provided. The sign 
shall be no smaller than 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches. 
103A.4.5 Maintenance and security requirements. The following maintenance and security 
requirements shall apply to a vacant or abandoned building. The Director has the discretion to 
modify these requirements in the case of a partially vacant building, and to modify or waive 
some or all of these requirements in the case of a building that has been damaged by fire, a 
natural disaster, or other calamity. 
103A.4.5.1 Maintenance of property – exterior. The property owner shall actively maintain 
and monitor the exterior of the building and the grounds so that they remain in continuing 
compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, and do not contribute to and are not likely 
to contribute to blight as defined in Chapter 80 of the Administrative Code. Active maintenance 
and monitoring shall include, but not be limited to: 
   (1)   Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials in good condition; 
   (2)   Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris, and graffiti; 
   (3)   Maintenance of the exterior of the building in a good condition that is structurally safe and 
preserves the physical integrity of the structure, including but not limited to paint and finishes, 
foundation, roof, chimneys, flues, gutters, downspouts, scuppers, flashing, skylights, windows, 
exterior stairs and decks; 
   (4)   Prevention of criminal activity on the premises and trespass by unauthorized persons; and 
   (5)   Turning off all utilities that are not necessary for the upkeep and maintenance of the 
building. 
103A.4.5.2 Maintenance of property – interior. The property owner shall preserve the interior 
of the building from damage by the elements or plumbing leaks, and keep it free from 
accumulation of garbage and other debris, and from infestation by rodents, insects, or other pests. 
103A.4.5.3 Security. The building shall be secured against unauthorized entry. The methods of 
security shall be as approved by the Director, who shall take into consideration whether the 
property has been cited for nuisance activities or criminal conduct by another department of the 
City and County of San Francisco or other government agency. 
103A.4.6 Insurance. The owner of record shall maintain whatever fire and liability insurance 
coverage the Director determines is necessary. Any insurance policy shall require notice to the 
Department in the event of cancellation of insurance or a reduction in coverage. 
103A.4.7 Violation a public nuisance; enforcement. A property in violation of the provisions 
of this section is deemed to be a public nuisance and subject to enforcement by the Department 
and penalties under Section 102A and 103A of this Code or under other applicable sections of 
the San Francisco Municipal Code or state law. 
103A.5 Vacant or Abandoned Commercial Storefronts – Annual Registration; Registration 
Fees; Maintenance and Security Requirements. 
103A.5.1 Definitions. For the purposes of Section 103A.5, including Sections 103A.5.1-
103A.5.7: 
   COMMERCIAL STOREFRONT. A Commercial Storefront shall be any area within a 
building that may be individually leased or rented for any purpose other than Residential Use as 
defined in Planning Code Sections 790.88 and 890.88. 

--- Page 22 ---
20 
   VACANT OR ABANDONED. A Commercial Storefront shall be Vacant or Abandoned if it 
(1) is unoccupied and unsecured; or (2) is unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar 
means; or (3) is unoccupied and unsafe as defined in Section 102A of this Code; or (4) is 
unoccupied and has multiple code violations; or (5) has been unoccupied for over 30 days. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, a Commercial Storefront shall not be considered Vacant 
or Abandoned if 
   (1)   There is a valid building permit for repair, rehabilitation, or construction of the 
Commercial Storefront and the owner completes the repair, rehabilitation, or construction within 
one year from the date the initial permit was issued, unless the Department, in its sole discretion, 
determines that the owner needs additional time to complete the repair, rehabilitation, or 
construction of the Commercial Storefront; or 
   (2)   The owner or leaseholder has filed an application for, and is actively seeking to obtain, 
authorization, permits, or a license required by state or local law permitting the lawful use and 
occupancy of the Commercial Storefront; or 
   (3)   The owner or leaseholder submits evidence to the Department that vacancy is due to 
public infrastructure construction or maintenance activity lasting longer than 30 days impacting 
the Commercial Storefront’s access to the nearest public right-of-way or essential utilities. 
Where the Commercial Storefront is vacant due to infrastructure construction or maintenance 
activity lasting longer than 30 days, the Commercial Storefront shall not be subject to the 
requirements in subsections 105A.5.2 through 105A.5.6 for 180 calendar days from the date of 
the submittal of evidence. The initial exemption period may be extended by the Department if 
additional evidence is submitted by the owner or leaseholder demonstrating infrastructure 
construction or maintenance activity continues to impact the Commercial Storefront. The owner 
or leaseholder shall alert the Department within 30 days of the conclusion of infrastructure 
construction or maintenance activity. 
103A.5.2 Property owner’s obligation to register a vacant or abandoned commercial 
storefront; registration fee. The owner of a Vacant or Abandoned Commercial Storefront shall, 
within 30 days after it has become vacant or abandoned, register the Commercial Storefront with 
the Department on a form provided by the Department. The form shall describe the methods by 
which the owner has secured the Commercial Storefront against unauthorized entry, provide a 
contact phone number for the Commercial Storefront owner or party responsible for maintenance 
of the Commercial Storefront, state the most recent legal use of the Commercial Storefront, state 
the square footage of the Commercial Storefront, declare any future plans for the Commercial 
Storefront, state whether there is fire and liability insurance coverage, and provide such other 
information as the Department may require. The owner shall pay an annual registration fee, 
which shall be due when the owner submits the registration form to the Department (“registration 
payment deadline”). The registration payment deadline will serve as the date for subsequent 
annual renewals of registration each year the Commercial Storefront remains Vacant or 
Abandoned (“annual renewal date”). The annual registration fee shall be paid on or before the 
annual renewal date. However, if the owner rents the Commercial Storefront to a tenant who 
occupies the premises in a manner that complies with all provisions of state and local law prior 
to the registration payment deadline, the Commercial Storefront shall be removed from the 
Department’s registry and the owner shall be refunded up to half of the registration fee based on 
any remaining days before the Commercial Storefront’s annual renewal date. The registration fee 
shall be equal to the amount due under Section 103A.4.2 of this Code. See Section 110A, Table 
1A-J for applicable fees. 

--- Page 23 ---
21 
103A.5.3 Annual Report. The owner of a registered Vacant or Abandoned Commercial 
Storefront shall provide a report from a licensed professional confirming the storefront’s interior 
and exterior has been maintained, as specified in Sections 103A.4.5.1 and 103A.4.5.2 of this 
Code (“annual report”). The annual report shall be provided to the Department when the owner 
renews the storefront’s registration and pays the annual renewal fee. 
103A.5.4 Maintenance of vacant or abandoned commercial storefront registry. The 
Department shall maintain a registry of all Vacant or Abandoned Commercial Storefronts within 
the City and shall furnish a copy of the registry to the Office of Economic and Workforce 
Development at least once per fiscal quarter. 
103A.5.5 Notice. Whenever the Director has probable cause to believe, based upon an 
inspection, complaint, or report from another agency of the City or other governmental agency, 
that a Commercial Storefront is Vacant or Abandoned and has not been registered as required by 
Section 103A.5.2, the Director shall serve the owner of record, as shown on the Assessor’s 
Records, or authorized agent with a written notice requiring the owner to register the 
Commercial Storefront with the Department as Vacant or Abandoned and pay the registration fee 
within the period of time specified in the notice, which shall be no greater than 30 days. The 
Department shall issue a Notice of Violation (“NOV”) pursuant to Section 102A.4 of this Code 
to owners that fail to register within the period of time specified in the notice. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-K, Failure to register vacant commercial storefront, for the applicable 
penalty. 
103A.5.6 Sign posting, maintenance, security, and insurance. All requirements listed in 
Sections 103A.4.4-103A.4.6 of this Code shall also apply to Vacant or Abandoned Commercial 
Storefronts. All such requirements shall be fulfilled by the owner within 30 days of the 
Commercial Storefront becoming Vacant or Abandoned, or within 30 days of the issuance of 
notice to register. 
103A.5.7 Violation a public nuisance; enforcement. A Commercial Storefront in violation of 
this Section 103A.5, including Sections 103A.5.1-103A.5.7, is deemed to be a public nuisance 
and subject to enforcement by the Department and penalties under Sections 102A and 103A and 
Section 110A, Table 1A-K of this Code or other applicable sections of the Municipal Code. 
103A.6 Expanded Compliance Control and permit review. 
103A.6.1 Significant violation tracking reports. When a building inspector issues a Notice of 
Violation in which there is an instance of: 
   (1)   Misrepresentation of existing conditions or project scope that results in circumvention of 
notification or review requirements; 
   (2)   Structural work or demolition of structural features without or beyond the scope of a 
building permit; 
   (3)   Work under permit performed by a party without required license; or 
   (4)   Other substantial non-compliance; 
Inspection Services Division shall log the violation and identify all individuals, agents, and other 
entities associated with the permit and/or project in the Permit Tracking System or known to be 
associated with the permit and/or project at the time the Notice of Violation is issued in the 
Compliance Control Tracking File maintained by the Inspection Services Division. The 
Compliance Control Tracking File is for internal purposes only; an individual, agent, or entity’s 
presence in the file does not indicate responsibility for any violation or misconduct. 
103A.6.2 Candidates for Expanded Compliance Control. 

--- Page 24 ---
22 
   (1)   The Inspection Services Division shall review the Compliance Control Tracking File on a 
monthly basis to determine if any project, individual, agent, or entity has been associated with 
three or more reported violations described in 103A.6.1 within the last 18 months. Any such 
project, individual, agent, or entity shall be a candidate for Expanded Compliance Control. 
   (2)   Even if the three-or-more-violations standard is not met during the 18-month period, the 
Department, in consultation with the City Attorney, may designate a project, individual, agent, or 
entity as a candidate for Expanded Compliance Control for any violation or violations that the 
Department determines, individually or together, to be egregious and create significant risk to 
health, safety, or property. 
103A.6.3 Expanded Compliance Control List. 
103A.6.3.1 Factors. In determining whether to include any candidate on the Expanded 
Compliance Control List, the following factors shall be considered: the candidate’s role and 
conduct that contributed to the violations; any impacts on individual or public health, and safety; 
whether the misrepresentation of existing conditions or the misrepresentation of project scope 
was reckless or intentional to avoid permit review or notification requirements; the extent of the 
demolition or work that occurred without or beyond the scope of a building permit or without the 
necessary license or certification; any impacts on historically significant structures; prospective 
undervaluation of the construction cost that resulted in lower permit fees from the violations; and 
the number, frequency, and severity of violations. 
103A.6.3.2 Process. For each project, individual, agent, or entity designated as a candidate for 
Expanded Compliance Control, the following actions shall be taken: 
   (1)   Inspection Services staff, designated by the Director of the Department of Building 
Inspection, shall notify the candidate and request any exculpatory information as to why 
Expanded Compliance Control is not warranted and shall draft a summary report detailing the 
violation(s) and exculpatory evidence or arguments, if any, relevant to whether the candidate 
warrants Expanded Compliance Control. 
   (2)   The summary report shall conclude with a determination: 
      (a)   that the candidate should be placed on the Expanded Compliance Control List, and 
provide written findings, including but not limited to findings in response to the factors described 
in 103A.6.3.1, supporting that determination; or 
      (b)   that the candidate should not be placed on the Expanded Compliance Control List, and 
provide written findings, including but not limited to findings in response to the factors described 
in 103A.6.3.1, for why the candidate does not warrant Expanded Compliance Control. 
   (3)   The Director of the Department of Building Inspection shall review all Expanded 
Compliance Control determinations made by designated staff and shall make a final 
determination either affirming or overruling the determination. The Director shall either adopt 
the staff findings or issue the Director’s own written findings detailing the basis for the final 
determination. The Department shall notify the candidate in writing of the Director’s final 
determination and shall post the final determination on the Department’s website in a manner 
that complies with section 104A.6. 
   (4)   Any person may appeal the Director’s final determination to the Building Inspection 
Commission pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 77 of the Administrative Code. 
   (5)   The Director shall maintain the Expanded Compliance Control List on the Department’s 
website and shall provide the list to the Building Inspection Commission on a quarterly basis 
commencing when the first project, individual, agent, or entity is placed on the list. 
103A.6.4 Expanded Compliance Control Provisions. 

--- Page 25 ---
23 
103A.6.4.1 Duration. Any project, individual, agent, or entity placed on the Expanded 
Compliance Control List (“listee”) shall remain on the list for five years. Any subsequent 
significant violation(s), as defined in subsection 103A.6.1, by a listee shall extend the period of 
Expanded Compliance Control for that listee by five years from the date of the subsequent 
violation(s). 
103A.6.4.2 Measures. Upon placing a project, individual, agent, or entity on the Expanded 
Compliance Control List, the Department shall take the following actions: 
   (1)   Refer the listee to any applicable licensing board or regulatory agency with the Director’s 
final determination and written findings; 
   (2)   Require all existing permit applications and addenda and any new applications or addenda 
submitted by or containing reference to the listee undergo Expanded Compliance Control by 
senior Plan Review Services staff and multi-station (all permit stations applicable to a given 
permit) review at intake and after the Planning Department approves the Site Permit (if 
applicable); and notify all parties listed on the applications or addenda for these permits of the 
Expanded Compliance Control requirement; 
   (3)   Require site inspections by the Department of Building Inspection and Planning 
Department prior to issuing any permit submitted by or containing reference to the listee; 
   (4)   Require that a licensed contractor be named on the permit prior to issuance, unless the 
applicant is filing for the permit as an Owner-Builder, in conformance with California Health 
and Safety Code Section 19825; 
   (5)   Dedicate a Senior Inspector to perform inspections and respond to any complaints or 
requests regarding the listee; and 
   (6)   If warranted, consult with the City Attorney about any additional enforcement actions. 
103A.6.5 Permit review staff training.  No later than September 30, 2021, the Department shall 
provide written guidance and conduct training sessions for all plan review staff on how to 
recognize and flag permits that signal potential abuse. All guidance and training materials and 
procedures shall be prepared with a goal of being sensitive to the cultural differences of 
individuals, agents, and other entities associated with permits and/or projects as well as current 
and future building occupants, workers, or adjacent neighbors. Further, the Department shall 
create and implement guidelines for staff to escalate any permits that indicate potential abuse to 
senior review staff for their review and refer such permits to the Planning Department to ensure 
they are consistent with preceding Planning Department approvals. 
 
SECTION 104A – ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
104A.1 Enforcement agency. The Department of Building Inspection shall be the administering 
and enforcing agency under this code. 
104A.2 Powers and duties of Building Official. 
104A.2.1 General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the 
provisions of this code. For such purposes, the Building Official shall have the powers of a law 
enforcement officer. 
   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13108, upon the written request of the chief fire 
official of any city, county or fire-protection district, the State Fire Marshal may authorize such 
chief fire official and his or her authorized representatives, in their geographical area of 
responsibility, to make fire-prevention inspections of state-owned or state-occupied buildings, 
other than state institutions, for the purpose of enforcing the regulations relating to fire and panic 
safety adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to this section and building standards relating 

--- Page 26 ---
24 
to fire and panic safety published in the California Building Standards Code. Authorization from 
the State Fire Marshal shall be limited to those fire departments or fire districts which maintain a 
fire-prevention bureau staffed by paid personnel. 
   Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13108, any requirement or order made by any 
chief fire official who is authorized by the State Fire Marshal to make fire-prevention inspections 
of state-owned or state occupied buildings, other than state institutions, may be appealed to the 
State Fire Marshal. The State Fire Marshal shall, upon receiving an appeal and subject to the 
provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 18945) of Part 2, 5 of Division 13 of the 
Health and Safety Code, determine if the requirement or order made is reasonably consistent 
with the fire and panic safety regulations adopted by the Office of the State Fire Marshal and 
building standards relating to fire and panic safety published in the California Building Code. 
   The Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt 
and enforce rules and supplemental regulations to clarify the application of its provisions. Such 
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this 
code. Such rules and regulations, commonly referred to as Code Rulings and Administrative 
Bulletins supplemental to this code shall not take effect until approved by the Building 
Inspection Commission and signed by the Building Official except in unusual circumstances 
where the Building Official has determined that there is an immediate need to protect the public 
health and safety. When the Building Official finds that such circumstances exist, the Building 
Official may order immediate enforcement of a particular rule or regulation. The Building 
Official shall arrange for a subscription service to such rules and regulations, the entire cost of 
which is to be borne by the subscribers. 
   NOTE: “Code Rulings” and “Administrative Bulletins” may be found in the Department’s 
Rules and Regulations printed at the back of this code. 
104A.2.2 Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the 
appointing authority, the building official may appoint such number of technical officers and 
inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. The building official 
may deputize such inspectors or employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the 
code enforcement agency. 
104A.2.3 Right of entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of 
this code or other codes or ordinances, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to 
believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to or in 
violation of this code or other codes or ordinances that makes the building or premises unsafe, 
dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable 
times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code or other codes or ordinances, 
provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the 
occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official 
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control 
of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have 
recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
104A.2.4 Stop orders. 
   (a)   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, or other 
pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code, the building 
official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the 
doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until 
authorized by the Bbuilding Oofficial to proceed with the work. 

--- Page 27 ---
25 
   (b)   If the Bbuilding Oofficial determines that a project has a history of repeated violations of 
this code or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this 
code, the Bbuilding Oofficial may stop all work on the project until all the code violations have 
been fully investigated and resolved. The director of any department with permitting authority 
for the project, including but not limited to the Director of Public Works and the Director of 
Planning, may request the Bbuilding Oofficial to stop all work on the project pending an 
investigation and resolution of the code violations at issue. 
104A.2.5 Occupancy violations. Whenever any building, structure, property or portion thereof 
regulated by this code is being used contrary to the provisions of this code or the code in effect at 
the time the use was commenced, the Building Official may order such use discontinued and the 
building, structure, property or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person involved 
in said use or causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the 
time prescribed by the Building Official after receipt of such notice to make the building, 
structure, property or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code; provided, 
however, that in the event of an unsafe building, structure or property the provisions of 
Section 102A shall apply. 
104A.2.6 Liability. The Building Official charged with the enforcement of this code, acting in 
good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other 
pertinent law or ordinance shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for damages that may 
accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the 
discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the Bbuilding Oofficial or employee because of 
such act or omission performed by the Bbuilding Oofficial or employee in the enforcement of 
any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the 
enforcement of this code or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be defended by this 
jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom 
shall be assumed by this jurisdiction. 
   This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person 
owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or 
property caused by defects, nor shall the code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be 
held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code or any 
permits or certificates issued under this code. 
104A.2.7 Modifications. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the 
provisions of this code, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases. The 
Bbuilding Oofficial shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this 
code impractical and that the modifications are in conformance with the intent and purpose of 
this code and that such modifications does not lessen any fire-protection requirements or any 
degree of structural integrity. The details of any action granting modifications shall be recorded 
and entered in the files of the code enforcement agency. 
104A.2.7.1 Local equivalencies. Due to unique topographical conditions in the City and County 
of San Francisco, including but not limited to the City’s built environment and historic pattern of 
development, equivalencies to certain code requirements have been developed by the 
Department and are approved on an individual basis if specific conditions are met. Wherever in 
this code a reference to Local Equivalency is made, details of the equivalency to the specific 
code requirement may be found in the Department’s Rules and Regulations printed at the back of 
this code. 

--- Page 28 ---
26 
104A.2.8 Alternate materials, design, and methods of construction. The provisions of this 
code are not intended to prevent the use of any material, alternate design or method of 
construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided any alternate has been approved 
and its use authorized by the building official. 
   The Bbuilding Oofficial may approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds 
that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this code and that the 
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that 
prescribed in this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and 
sanitation. 
   The Bbuilding Oofficial shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to 
substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of any action granting 
approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the code enforcement 
agency. 
104A.2.8.1 Alternate for materials, design, tests and methods of construction. Subject to 
other provisions of law, alterations, repairs, replacements, occupancy, use and maintenance 
provisions, and moved buildings are referenced in the State Housing Law, Health and Safety 
Code, Sections 17912, 17920.3, 17922(c), 17922.3, 17958.8 and 17958.9 and California Code of 
Regulations, Title 25, Chapter 1 commencing with Section 1. Health and Safety Code Sections 
17958.8 and 17958.9 are repeated here to provide clarity and read as follows: 
   Section 17958.8. Local ordinances or regulations governing alterations and repair of existing 
buildings shall permit the replacement, retention, and extension of original materials and the use 
of original methods of construction for any building or accessory structure subject to this part, 
including a hotel, lodging house, motel, apartment house, or dwelling, or portions thereof, as 
long as the portion of the building and structure subject to the replacement, retention, or 
extension of original materials and the use of original methods of construction complies with the 
building code provisions governing that portion of the building or accessory structure at the time 
of construction, and the other rules and regulations of the department or alternative local 
standards governing that portion at the time of its construction and adopted pursuant to Section 
13143.2 and the building or accessory structure does not become or continue to be a substandard 
building. 
   Section 17958.9. Local ordinances or regulations governing the moving of apartment houses 
and dwellings shall, after July 1, 1978, permit the retention of existing materials and methods of 
construction so long as the apartment house or dwelling complies with the building standards for 
foundation applicable to new construction, and does not become or continue to be a substandard 
building. 
104A.2.8.2 Reserved. 
104A.2.8.3 Approval and evaluation of materials or systems, methods and types of 
construction, fabricators, and testing or plan review agencies. General. This section is 
applicable to evaluations conducted and to approvals granted by the Department, for use in San 
Francisco, for alternate materials not covered in this code; for plant fabrications of building 
components which normally require special inspection; for testing or plan review agencies; for 
evaluation of materials, product methods and types of construction. 
   Any approval shall be void if, after approval, the design or nature of the device or material, the 
method of construction, the quality control program, or the capabilities of the agency, are found 
to deviate in any way from that represented to the Department or the conditions of approval, 
without first obtaining written authorization from the Building Official. 

--- Page 29 ---
27 
   Any approval may be suspended or revoked if the Building Official finds the approved device 
or material, method of construction, or quality control program does not meet the requirements 
of Sections 104A.2.8 or 1701 to such an extent that the approval should not have been granted. 
See Section 110A, Table 1A-J – Product Approvals – for applicable fees. The fees specified are 
application fees and are not refundable regardless of whether the action taken is an approval or a 
denial or whether a subsequent request for hearing by the Board of Examiners is filed, except for 
the case where an application was filed at the request or on the advice of the Department for 
situations which subsequently are determined to not require an approval. 
   Each approval shall become null and void unless renewed within the specified period. 
104A.2.9 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with any of the 
provisions of this code or evidence that any material or construction does not conform to the 
requirements of this code, the building official may require tests as proof of compliance to be 
made at no expense to this jurisdiction. 
   Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other recognized test standards. If there 
are no recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the building official shall 
determine test procedures. 
   All tests shall be made by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the 
building official for the period required for the retention of public records. 
104A.2.10 Cooperation of other officials and officers. The Bbuilding Oofficial may request, 
and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as is 
required in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance. 
104A.2.11 Code revision process. An amendment to the text of the Building Code, Electrical 
Code, Housing Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Green Building Code, or other Code 
enforced by the Department of Building Inspection may be initiated by introduction by a member 
of the Board of Supervisors of a proposed ordinance approved as to form by the City Attorney, 
or by a recommendation of the Building Official to the Building Inspection Commission 
pursuant to Section 104A.2.11.2. 
104A.2.11.1. Code revisions initiated by the Board of Supervisors; transmittal to the 
Building Inspection Commission. Upon introduction of an ordinance amending the Codes cited 
above in Section 104A.2.11, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall transmit the proposed 
ordinance to the Building Inspection Commission for a public hearing pursuant to Section 
D3.750-5 4.121 of the San Francisco Charter. 
104A.2.11.1.1. Commission hearing and recommendation. The Building Inspection 
Commission shall hold a hearing on the proposed code amendment or amendments and make a 
recommendation of approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment(s), in whole or in part, 
to the Board of Supervisors within 90 days from the date of their referral by the Board to the 
Commission. Failure of the Commission to act within the prescribed time shall be deemed to 
constitute disapproval, except that the Board may, by resolution, extend the prescribed time 
within which the Commission is to render its decision. In the case of Commission’s approval or 
disapproval, in whole or in part, of the proposed amendment(s), the Board may adopt the 
ordinance by majority vote. 
104A.2.11.1.2. Referral back to the Building Inspection Commission. In acting upon any 
proposed amendment to the text of the Codes cited in Section 104A.2.11 above, the Board of 
Supervisors may modify said amendment but shall not take final action upon any material 
modification that has not been approved or disapproved by the Building Inspection Commission. 
If the Board of Supervisors makes such a material modification, the amended ordinance 

--- Page 30 ---
28 
approved as to form by the City Attorney shall be referred back to the Commission. In all such 
cases of referral back, the amendment with the proposed modification shall be heard by the 
Building Inspection Commission according to the requirements for a new proposal set forth in 
Section 104A.2.11.1.1. 
104A.2.11.2. Code Revisions recommended by the Building Official. The Building Official 
shall transmit to the Building Inspection Commission, at intervals not exceeding three years, 
recommendations for changes to this code, based on studies of the following: 
   1.   Requests of the Board of Examiners for modifications from the code, and for approvals of 
alternate materials, alternate designs and methods of construction. 
   2.   Code changes recommended by the Board of Examiners. 
   3.   Code changes recommended by the Code Advisory Committee or other bodies subordinate 
to the Building Inspection Commission. 
   4.   Results obtained and problems encountered in legal actions taken to correct code 
violations. 
   5.   Changes or improvements in materials, methods of construction or design, and changes 
proposed by interested persons. 
   6.   Investigations of fire and structural damage to buildings, and of determination of 
unsatisfactory building performance. 
   7.   Periodic changes to the California Building Code and other State regulations which may 
affect this code. 
   8.   Administrative Bulletins and Code Rulings currently in effect. 
   9.   Violations of the code found on inspections or investigations. 
104A.3 Service of notices. 
104A.3.1 Notices sent.  Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless 
different provisions are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal 
delivery to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, 
postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at such person’s last known business or 
residence address. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit 
in the United States mail. 
104A.3.2 Proof of notice. Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any 
officer or employee of the City and County of San Francisco or by affidavit of any person over 
the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with the San Francisco Municipal 
Code or other provisions or law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
104A.4 Code Enforcement and Rehabilitation Fund. All funds deposited by the State 
Controller from the Local Agency Code Enforcement and Rehabilitation Fund shall be deposited 
into the Code Enforcement and Rehabilitation Fund established by Section 10.100-45 of the 
Administrative Code. 
104A.4.1 Use of funds. The Code Enforcement and Rehabilitation Fund shall be used 
exclusively to defray costs incurred in the enforcement of local code provisions mandated by 
State law. 
104A.5 Building Inspection Fund. All revenue collected pursuant to this Code shall be 
deposited into the Building Inspection Fund and its Subfunds established by the City Controller 
pursuant to Section 10.100-45 of the Administrative Code. The Building Inspection Fund shall 
be used by the Department, subject to the approval of the Building Inspection Commission, to 
defray costs incurred for, but not limited to, personnel, supplies, and equipment used in 
evaluating the applications, maintaining files and records, and for disseminating information, 

--- Page 31 ---
29 
reviewing plans and making inspections to determine compliance with the conditions of 
approvals. Any charges established by the Building Official or the Building Inspection 
Commission for copies of approvals, publications or other Department records shall be deposited 
into this fund.  Deposits into and expenditures from the Subfunds shall be made pursuant to the 
provisions of Section 10.100-45(c) of the Administrative Code. 
104A.6 Multiple Languages in Notices. 
104A.6.1 Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
   DEDICATED TELEPHONE NUMBER means a telephone number for a recorded message in 
a language of limited English proficient residents. The recorded message shall advise callers as 
to what information they should leave on the message machine so that the Department may 
return the call with information about the notice in the requested language. 
   LANGUAGE OF LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENT RESIDENTS means each of the two 
languages other than English spoken most commonly by San Francisco residents of English 
proficiency as determined by the Planning Department based on its annual review of United 
States census and other data as required by San Francisco Administrative Code Section 91.2(j). 
104A.6.2 Applicability of multiple language requirement. The requirements of 
Section 104A.6.3 shall apply to the following notices: 
   1.   Notices required by Section 103A.3.3 that are mailed or personally served. 
   2.   Notices required by Section 106A.3.2.2.1. 
   3.   Notices required by Section 106A.3.2.3. 
   4.   Notices required by Section 106A.4.6, Subsection 2. 
   5.   Notices required by Section 106A.4.6, Subsection 3. 
   6.   Notices required by San Francisco Existing Building Code Section 328.3.2. 
   7.   Any other notices required by the Building Code to be mailed or personally served to 
property owners or occupants adjacent to or near a property for which Building Department 
development approval is sought. 
104A.6.3 Multiple language statement in notices. The Building Department shall prepare a 
cover sheet as specified below and include it with each notice of the type listed in 
Section 104A.6.2 that is mailed or personally served. For posted notices listed in 
Section 104A.6.2, the Department shall post the cover sheet next to the posted notice. The cover 
sheet shall contain the following statement, printed in each language of limited English proficient 
residents and, to the extent available Department resources allow, such other languages that the 
Department determines desirable, with the name of the language in which the statement is made, 
the time period for a decision on the matter and the dedicated telephone number for the language 
of the statement inserted in the appropriate blank spaces: 
   “The attached notice is provided under the Building Code. It concerns property located at the 
address shown on the attached notice. A hearing may occur, a right to request review may expire 
or a development approval may become final unless appealed within [insert days until a hearing 
or deadline for requesting review or appealing a decision]. To obtain information about this 
notice in [insert name of language] please call [insert dedicated telephone number]. Please be 
advised that the Building Department will require at least one business day to respond to any 
call. Provision of information in [insert name of language] is provided as a service by the 
Building Department and does not grant any additional rights or extend any time limits provided 
by applicable law.” 
   The Department shall maintain a dedicated telephone number for each language of limited 
English proficient residents. The Department shall place a return telephone call by the end of the 

--- Page 32 ---
30 
following business day to each person who leaves a message concerning a neighborhood notice 
at a dedicated telephone number and, when the caller is reached, provide information to the 
caller about the notice in the language spoken by the caller. 
 
SECTION 105A – BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND 
COMMITTEES 
105A.1 Board of Examiners. 
105A.1.1 Establishment. There is hereby created a Board of Examiners who are qualified by 
experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building design and construction. The 
functions of the Board of Examiners shall be: 
105A.1.1.1 To determine whether specific new materials, new methods and types of construction 
comply with the standards of safety established by this code, and to recommend the approval or 
disapproval of such new materials, new methods and types of construction. 
105A.1.1.2 To determine whether variances from the requirements of this code should be 
approved for specific cases where new materials, new methods and types of construction are not 
involved, and where the enforcement of compliance therewith would result in unreasonable 
hardship. 
105A.1.1.3 To recommend to the Building Official reasonable interpretations of the provisions 
of this code. 
105A.1.1.4 To hear appeals from any Abatement Order of the Building Official involving 
construction methods, assemblies or materials or where safety is involved. 
   A copy of the findings of the Board of Examiners shall be forwarded to the Abatement Appeals 
Board. 
   Matters involving compliance with Chapters 16B and 16C and other related structural 
provisions of this code regulating the strengthening of unreinforced masonry bearing wall 
buildings shall be heard by the Board of Examiners as provided in Section 105A.1. 
105A.1.2 Definition. The term “standard of safety,” as used in this section, shall mean the 
general degree of safety conforming to the provisions of this code as required to safeguard life or 
limb, health and public welfare. 
105A.1.3 Intent. It is the intent of this section that new materials, new methods and types of 
construction which do not comply with the standards of safety established by this code shall in 
no event be approved; but that the requirements of this code, other than those involving such 
standards of safety, may be modified or waived under the circumstances set forth in this section. 
105A.1.4 Membership. The Board of Examiners shall consist of 13 members, which shall 
include one plumbing member and one electrical member, who shall serve only when cases 
related to plumbing or electrical code issues are being considered, and one high-rise sprinkler 
member who shall serve only when cases related to high-rise sprinkler issues are being 
considered, and three seismic improvement members who shall serve only when cases related to 
San Francisco Existing Building Code Chapter 4DE seismic retrofit issues are being considered. 
All members are to be appointed by the Building Inspection Commission and shall serve at the 
Building Inspection Commission’s pleasure for a three-year term or until a successor is 
appointed. The present members shall be continued in office until the expiration of their terms. 
   In the event a vacancy occurs during the term of office of any member of the Board of 
Examiners, a new appointment shall be made in a manner similar to that described herein for 
new members. 
   The membership shall consist of: 

--- Page 33 ---
31 
   1.   A registered structural engineer. 
   2.   A registered mechanical engineer. 
   3.   A registered electrical engineer. 
   4.   A registered fire protection engineer. 
   5.   A licensed general contractor. 
   6.   A licensed architect. 
   7.   A building trades representative. 
   8.   As the plumbing member, a licensed plumbing contractor. 
   9.   As the electrical member, a licensed electrical contractor. 
   10.   As a high-rise sprinkler member, one building owner representative. 
   11.   As a Seismic Improvement member, one tenant also a licensed or registered architect, 
civil or structural engineer. 
   12.   As a Seismic Improvement member, one property owner also a licensed or registered 
architect, civil or structural engineer. 
   13.   As a Seismic Improvement member, one registered structural engineer specializing in 
seismic improvement. 
   The terms “registered” and “licensed” shall be understood to mean by the State of California. 
The Building Inspection Commission shall make such appointments after giving careful 
consideration to nominations made by technical associations and general contractor 
organizations including the Consulting Engineers Association of California, the Structural 
Engineers Association of Northern California, the San Francisco District of the Associated 
General Contractors of California, the Plumbing and Mechanical Cooling Contractors of San 
Francisco, the San Francisco Electrical Contractors Association, the San Francisco Chapter of 
the American Institute of Architects, and the San Francisco Building Trades Council. Each 
member of the Board of Examiners shall receive compensation of $125 per meeting attended. 
   The following shall constitute ex officio members of the Board of Examiners, without vote and 
without compensation: The Building Official, who shall act as Secretary of the Board of 
Examiners, and the Fire Marshal. 
   In the event a member cannot attend meetings of the Board of Examiners for a period of three 
or more consecutive meetings due to illness, work away from San Francisco, or any other valid 
reason, the Building Inspection Commission may appoint an alternate member representing the 
same profession or trade as the absent member and meeting the same registration or licensing 
requirements as the absent member. The appointment of such alternate need not require 
solicitation of nominees from the respective organizations. The alternate shall serve on the Board 
of Examiners until the return of the absent member or until the expiration of the absent member’s 
term, whichever comes first. The compensation indicated in section 4 above shall be paid the 
alternate member for each meeting attended. The alternate member shall, during the time of 
service on the Board of Examiners, have all the rights, duties, and privileges of a duly appointed 
member of the Board of Examiners. 
105A.1.5 Board of Examiners’s authority with respect to applications for approval of 
materials, methods and types of construction. Where application has been made to the 
Building Official to approve new materials, new methods and types of construction which the 
applicant believes meet the standards of safety set by this code, and where the approval of such 
application has been denied by the Building Official, the Board of Examiners shall have 
authority, at the request of the applicant, to determine whether such materials, methods and types 
of construction comply therewith. 

--- Page 34 ---
32 
105A.1.5.1 The Board of Examiners shall adopt rules and specifications for examining and 
testing proposed materials and methods of construction. A copy of such rules and specifications 
shall be furnished to the applicant. 
105A.1.5.2 The applicant shall cause to be made, at the applicant’s expense, all reasonable tests 
and examinations required by the Board of Examiners to substantiate the applicant’s claims that 
any proposed new materials, new methods and types of construction comply with the standards 
of safety established by this code. 
105A.1.5.3 The Board of Examiners shall have power to call upon such experts as it deems 
necessary to consider and report upon the technical matters concerning such application. The 
engagement of the services of such experts shall be with the consent of and at the expense of the 
applicant, and the Board of Examiners shall have power to require security for the payment of 
such expense. Such expense shall be in addition to the required filing fees as set forth in 
Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments. Any official 
or employee of the City and County of San Francisco called upon by the Board of Examiners 
shall serve without compensation beyond their normal salary. 
105A.1.5.4 The Board of Examiners shall certify the results of examinations and tests, together 
with its recommendation on the application, to the Building Official. If the Board of Examiners 
recommends approval, the Building Official shall thereupon approve the materials or methods of 
construction. The Board of Examiners shall have power to attach such conditions to its 
recommendations as it deems necessary in the interest of public safety, and the Building 
Official’s approval shall be granted subject to such conditions. 
105A.1.6 Board of Examiners’ authority with respect to applications for variances from 
code requirements. Where new materials, new methods and types of construction are not 
involved, the Board of Examiners shall have authority to consider the application for a permit, 
the approval of which would require a variance from the provisions of this code. 
   If the Board of Examiners finds that such variance will not result in a condition less safe and 
less desirable from the viewpoint of public welfare than would result from the enforcement of 
compliance with such provisions, it shall recommend to the Building Official the approval of 
such permit. Upon receipt of such recommendation, the Building Official shall approve such 
permit. The Board of Examiners may attach to such recommendations any conditions which 
public safety and welfare may require, and the Building Official in approving such permit shall 
incorporate such conditions therein. 
105A.1.7 Application for consideration by Board of Examiners. All applications to the Board 
of Examiners shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board of 
Examiners. The Board of Examiners shall act upon each application without unreasonable or 
unnecessary delay. See Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement 
Assessments – for applicable fee. 
105A.1.8 Procedure. The Board of Examiners shall establish reasonable rules and regulations 
for its own procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this code and the Charter of the 
City and County of San Francisco. The Board of Examiners, by a majority vote, shall choose its 
officers, which shall consist of the President and Vice-President. 
105A.1.9 Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Examiners shall be held at the call of the Secretary 
of the Board of Examiners and at such times and places as the Board of Examiners may 
determine. All meetings of the Board of Examiners shall be public meetings. 
105A.1.10 Quorum. Four members of the Board of Examiners shall constitute a quorum, and 
action of the Board of Examiners shall require the affirmative votes of not less than three 

--- Page 35 ---
33 
members. No member of the Board of Examiners shall pass upon any question in which the 
member, or any corporation in which the member is a shareholder or holds an interest. 
105A.1.11 Decisions by resolution. Every decision and recommendation of the Board of 
Examiners shall be by resolution filed with the Building Official. A copy shall be mailed to the 
applicant. A copy shall also be sent to other interested bureaus or departments charged with the 
enforcement of this code. The Board of Examiners shall arrange for a subscription service to its 
agenda and decisions, the entire cost of which shall be borne by the subscribers. 
105A.1.12 Record of meetings. The Board of Examiners shall maintain a tape recording of each 
meeting. Upon request, these tape recordings shall be made available for duplication by 
independent agencies with proper security afforded as determined by the Building Official. All 
costs of duplication shall be borne by the party requesting duplication. 
105A.2 Abatement Appeals Board. 
105A.2.1 Establishment. There is hereby established an Abatement Appeals Board, consisting 
of the seven members of the Building Inspection Commission, to pass upon matters pertaining to 
housing, building and construction. 
105A.2.2 Membership. Members of the Abatement Appeals Board shall be the Building 
Inspection Commission who are appointed and serve for the terms as prescribed by the Charter 
of the City and County of San Francisco. The Building Official or designee shall act as Secretary 
to the Abatement Appeals Board. 
105A.2.3 Powers. Except for cases involving disabled access, which shall be heard by the 
Access Appeals Commission, the Abatement Appeals Board shall have the power to hear and 
decide appeals from Orders of Abatement after public hearing by the Building Official of 
Building Inspection, and to hear appeals regarding the issuance of a final bill for assessment of 
costs imposed pursuant to Section 102A upon a showing of substantial error by the Department. 
Appeals for assessment of cost must be filed by the property owner in writing with the Secretary 
of the Abatement Appeals Board within 15 days of the mailing of the assessment of cost notice. 
See Section 110A, Table 1A-D – Standard Hourly Rates, and Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, 
Code Enforcement Assessments – for applicable fees. The Abatement Appeals Board may 
uphold, modify or reverse such orders, provided that the public health, safety and public welfare 
are secured most nearly in accordance with the intent and purpose of this code and the San 
Francisco Housing Code. 
105A.2.4 Procedure. The Abatement Appeals Board shall establish reasonable rules and 
regulations for its own procedures consistent with the provision of this code and the Charter of 
the City and County of San Francisco. The Abatement Appeals Board, by majority vote, shall 
choose its officers which shall consist of the President and Vice-President. 
105A.2.5 Quorum. Four members of the Abatement Appeals Board shall constitute a quorum. 
Any action of the Abatement Appeals Board shall require the concurrence of four members. No 
member of the Abatement Appeals Board shall pass upon any case in which the member, or any 
corporation in which the member is a shareholder, or holds an interest. 
105A.2.6 Hearings. All hearings of the Abatement Appeals Board shall be public hearings. 
Within 10 days after the filing of an appeal, the Abatement Appeals Board shall fix the time and 
place for a hearing, which shall not be more than 30 days after the date of filing. The notice of 
the hearing of such appeal shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property that is the 
subject of the appeal and shall be served upon the appellant and transmitted to the Building 
Official of Building Inspection at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. Once an 
appeal is filed, the order of the Building Official shall be stayed until a decision is rendered. 

--- Page 36 ---
34 
   For good cause shown, one continuance of a hearing may be granted by the Abatement 
Appeals Board; such continuance shall not exceed 60 days. 
105A.2.7 Rehearing. The Abatement Appeals Board may rehear an appeal upon which a 
decision has been rendered, provided a request for a rehearing has been made in writing within 
10 days of the date of issuance of the decision. 
105A.2.8 Findings and decisions. The Abatement Appeals Board shall issue its findings and 
decisions no later than 10 days after the conclusion of the hearing. Such findings and decisions 
shall within five days thereafter be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property that is the 
subject of the appeal, served on the appellant, and transmitted to the Building Official. 
105A.2.8.1 Failure of appellant to appear. In the event the appellant fails to appear at the 
hearing or if the Abatement Appeals Board fails to issue its findings and decisions within the 
time set forth above, or denies the appeal, the order of the Building Official shall be immediately 
effective from the date the order was issued; however the time that the matter was under appeal 
shall not be counted toward the time set in the order for compliance. 
   EXCEPTION: Except in cases of lack of quorum, failure of the Abatement Appeals Board to 
meet any of the time periods specified herein shall result in the Building Official’s order taking 
effect immediately. 
105A.2.8.2 Life-safety hazards. In any appeal of a decision where the Abatement Appeals 
Board finds that there exists in, on, or near any building, structure or property, any condition 
constituting a serious and imminent hazard to the life, health, or safety of any person, structure, 
or property, any decision of the Abatement Appeals Board modifying the order of the Building 
Official shall provide for immediate protection of the public, and that work to correct each such 
hazard commence within 30 days and be completed within 90 days after service of such decision. 
With respect to violations which are not found by the Abatement Appeals Board to constitute a 
serious and imminent hazard, any decision of the Abatement Appeals Board modifying the order 
of the Building Official shall provide that the work to repair such violations commence within 60 
days and be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed 18 months. 
105A.2.8.3 Moratorium – financial hardship. In any case of extreme financial hardship, the 
Abatement Appeals Board may grant a moratorium to correct conditions which are not serious 
and imminent hazards. Such a moratorium shall be granted only to an owner occupant of a 
single- or two-family dwelling where all such serious and imminent hazards, as found by the 
Building Official, have been corrected. The decision of the Abatement Appeals Board in any 
case in which a moratorium is granted shall contain the duration of the moratorium and the 
conditions for its termination. A copy of the decision granting a moratorium shall be recorded in 
the Assessor-Recorder’s Office. 
105A.2.8.4 Moratorium – displacement. Notwithstanding the provisions of this code and the 
San Francisco Housing Code, the Abatement Appeals Board, upon the written appeal of any 
person, may grant a moratorium from enforcement of an order of the Building Official made 
pursuant to Section 102A in order to prevent displacement of low and moderate income persons 
from affordable housing, if the Board finds that: 
   1.   The Building Official’s order from which the appeal is taken was issued after April 1, 
1986; and 
   2.   The property is a Group R, Division 1 building as defined in this code; and 
   3.   The building was constructed prior to January 1, 1956; and 
   4.   The condition does not constitute a serious and imminent hazard or a life hazard as defined 
in Section 213 of this code; and 

--- Page 37 ---
35 
   5.   The condition does not violate the Fire Code or any code other than this code and the San 
Francisco Housing Code; and 
   6.   The condition does not affect adequate egress from the building; and 
   7.   The condition does not endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the 
public or the occupants of the building; and 
   8.   Fifty percent or more of the households living in the building are paying annual rent equal 
to or less than 30 percent of the annual rent of low and moderate income as determined in 
Section 104A.4 of the Building Code; and 
   9.   The abatement of the condition will have a reasonable probability of resulting in the 
displacement of occupants who are of low and moderate income as defined above. 
105A.2.8.5 Findings. The Board shall serve the Building Official, the property owner, and the 
person requesting the moratorium if other than the property owner, by sending a copy of its 
findings and decision by certified mail to such persons at their last known address. A copy of the 
findings and the decision granting a moratorium shall be recorded in the Assessor-Recorder’s 
Office. 
105A.2.8.6 Term of moratorium. The maximum term of the moratorium shall be 10 years from 
the date that the Board’s findings and decision are served on the Building Official. At any time 
during the term of a moratorium under this section, any person may request that the Abatement 
Appeals Board extend the moratorium for one or more five-year periods by filing a written 
request with the Secretary of the Board. The Board shall hold a hearing on the request and shall 
issue separate findings and decisions regarding each request for an extension. The findings must 
address the nine criteria listed in this section. Any request for an extension of the moratorium 
shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures of this section. 
105A.2.8.7 Rescission of moratorium. At any time during the term of a moratorium, any 
person, including the Building Official, may request that the Abatement Appeals Board rescind 
the moratorium by filing a written request with the Board. The Board shall hold a hearing on the 
request and issue separate findings and decisions regarding each such request for a rescission. 
Any request for a rescission of the moratorium shall be subject to the notice and hearing 
procedures of this section. 
105A.2.8.8 Violations listed. The moratorium shall apply only to those code violations expressly 
listed therein. All other violations which exist and are not so listed in the findings and decisions 
granting the moratorium shall be abated in accordance with Section 102A. 
105A.2.8.9 Duration. Once the Board’s order granting a moratorium is issued, the building is no 
longer considered a nuisance or a substandard building for the duration of the moratorium with 
respect to those code violations expressly listed in the Board’s findings and decisions. 
105A.2.9 Failure to comply. Upon the failure of any owner to comply with the order of the 
Building Official or the Abatement Appeals Board, the matter shall be referred within five days 
to the City Attorney’s Office for appropriate legal action. 
105A.2.10 Compensation. The members of the Abatement Appeals Board shall serve without 
compensation. 
105A.3 Access Appeals Commission. 
105A.3.1 Establishment; composition; purpose. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 19957.5 
of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, there is hereby established an Appeals 
Board to be known as the Access Appeals Commission composed of five members to hear 
written appeals brought by any person regarding action taken by the Department in the 
enforcement of the requirements of Part 5.5 (commencing with Section 19955), Division 13 of 

--- Page 38 ---
36 
the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, including the exceptions contained in 
Section 19957 thereof, as well as action taken by the Department in the enforcement of the 
disabled access and adaptability provisions of this code. 
105A.3.2 Appointments; qualifications; terms; vacancies; compensation. Members of the 
Access Appeals Commission shall be qualified and appointed as follows: 
   1.   Two members of the Access Appeals Commission shall be persons with a physical 
disability, two members shall be experienced in construction, and one member shall be a public 
member. All shall be appointed by the Building Inspection Commission and serve at its pleasure. 
The terms shall be staggered and the term of each member shall be four years. Members shall 
continue in office until the expiration of his or her term and until his or her successor is 
appointed and qualified. 
   2.   Upon a vacancy occurring in the membership of the Access Appeals Commission and upon 
the expiration in the term of office of any member, a successor shall be appointed by the 
Building Inspection Commission. When a vacancy occurs for any reason other than the 
expiration of a term of office, the appointee to fill such vacancy shall hold office for the 
unexpired term of his or her predecessor. The members of the Access Appeals Commission shall 
be reimbursed at $125 per meeting attended. The Building Official or his or her designated 
representative shall act as Secretary of the Access Appeals Commission, without vote and 
without additional compensation. The Department shall provide necessary staff service to the 
Access Appeals Commission. 
105A.3.3 Powers and duties; finality. The Access Appeals Commission shall conduct hearings 
on written appeals made under Section 105A.3.4 hereof. In hearing such appeals, the Access 
Appeals Commission may approve or disapprove the Department’s interpretations of Part 5.5, 
Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and of the disability access 
and adaptability requirements of this code and actions taken by the Department to enforce said 
requirements and abate violations. The Commission shall also make determinations on 
equivalent facilitation, technical infeasibility, unreasonable hardship, and extensions of time.  All 
such approvals or disapprovals shall be final and conclusive as to the Department, in the absence 
of fraud or prejudicial abuse of discretion. See Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, 
Code Enforcement Assessments – for applicable fee. 
105A.3.4 Form of appeal – action on. All appeals to the Access Appeals Commission shall be 
made in writing and shall be filed with the Secretary of the Access Appeals Commission. The 
Access Appeals Commission shall act upon each appeal without unreasonable or unnecessary 
delay. 
105A.3.4.1 Rehearings. The Access Appeals Commission may rehear an appeal upon which a 
decision has been rendered upon motion of a member of the Access Appeals Commission and 
upon the affirmative vote of at least three of its members, provided that a request for a rehearing 
has been made in writing within 10 days of the date of the decision. See Section 110A, Table 
1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments – for applicable fee. 
105A.3.5 Procedure. The Access Appeals Commission shall establish reasonable rules and 
regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this code and the 
Charter of the City and County of San Francisco. The Access Appeals Commission, by a 
majority vote, shall choose its officers, other than the Secretary. 
105A.3.6 Meetings. Meetings of the Access Appeals Commission shall be at such times as the 
Access Appeals Commission may determine. All meetings of the Access Appeals Commission 
shall be public meetings. 

--- Page 39 ---
37 
105A.3.7 Agenda and record. The Access Appeals Commission shall arrange for the 
maintenance of a record of its agenda, actions and recommendations which shall be available to 
the public upon request for the cost of reproduction. 
105A.3.8 Decisions by resolution. Every decision and recommendation of the Access Appeals 
Commission shall be by resolution, which shall be retained as part of the Access Appeals 
Commission’s official records. A copy shall be mailed to the appellant. 
105A.3.9 Waiver of fee. An exemption from paying the Access Appeals Commission Filing 
Fees specified in Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement 
Assessments – may be granted upon the appellant’s filing with the Department a declaration of 
indigency under penalty of perjury. The declaration shall be made on a form provided by the 
Department and shall be accompanied by such documentary proof as the Building Official shall 
require. 
105A.3.10 Notice to Mayor’s Office of Disability. Materials for each matter to be decided by 
the Commission shall be sent to the Mayor’s Office of Disability, together with a copy of the 
meeting agenda, at the same time and in the same manner as the materials and agenda are 
provided to members of the Commission. 
105A.4 Code Advisory Committee. 
105A.4.1 Establishment. There is hereby created a Code Advisory Committee consisting of 
seventeen members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining 
to the development and improvement of the content of the California Building Standards Code 
and the San Francisco Housing Code and their related rules and regulations as well as provisions 
of other parts of the Municipal Code that the Building Official and the Building Inspection 
Commission determine have an impact on construction permits. 
105A.4.2 Functions. Unless the Building Official and Chair of the Building Inspection 
Commission specifically waive review by the Code Advisory Committee because the proposed 
code changes or rules and regulations are solely administrative and non-technical in nature, the 
Code Advisory Committee shall: 
   1.   hear and review recommendations for code changes made by the Building Official and the 
Building Inspection Commission pursuant to Section 104A.2.11; 
   2.   hear and review or develop and make recommendations for code changes to the Building 
Official and the Building Inspection Commission; 
   3.   review rules and regulations promulgated by the Building Official and the Building 
Inspection Commission pursuant to Section 104A.2.1; 
   4.   recommend to the Building Official and the Building Inspection Commission, within 30 
days after the effective date of a new edition of a code, which existing Section 104A.2 rules and 
regulations should remain in effect, be modified or be canceled; and 
   5.   hear and review, and make recommendations to the Building Inspection Commission on, 
legislation proposed by the Board of Supervisors. If the Code Advisory Committee fails to make 
its recommendations to the Building Inspection Commission within the period of time required 
for the Commission to complete its action under Section 104A.2.11.1.1 of this Code or any 
extension of time authorized by the Board of Supervisors, the Chair of the Commission may 
waive the Code Advisory Committee’s review and calendar the legislation for action by the 
Commission. 
105A.4.3 Membership. The Code Advisory Committee shall consist of 17 members appointed 
by the Building Inspection Commission to serve at the Building Inspection Commission’s 
pleasure for a three-year term or until a successor is appointed and qualified. 

--- Page 40 ---
38 
105A.4.3.1 Members. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of office of any 
member of the Code Advisory Committee, a new member shall be appointed in a manner similar 
to that described herein for new members. The membership shall consist of: 
   1.   A licensed architect whose practice is primarily in the area of major commercial and 
institutional projects of Type I and II construction. 
   2.   A licensed architect whose practice is primarily in the area of smaller commercial and 
residential projects of Type III and V construction. 
   3.   A registered civil engineer whose practice is primarily in the area of major commercial and 
institutional projects of Type I and II construction and who has the authority to use the title 
“Structural Engineer.” 
   4.   A registered civil engineer whose practice is primarily in the area of smaller commercial 
and residential projects of Type III and V construction. 
   5.   A registered mechanical engineer or licensed mechanical contractor. 
   6.   A registered fire protection engineer who practices in the area of fire protection. 
   7.   A registered electrical engineer or licensed electrical contractor. 
   8.   A representative of a licensed general contractor whose work is primarily in the area of 
major commercial and institutional projects of Type I and II construction. 
   9.   A representative of a licensed general contractor whose work is primarily in the area of 
alterations, remodeling or restoration. 
   10.   A representative of a licensed general contractor whose work is primarily the construction 
of single- and multifamily residential construction for its own account. 
   11.   A commercial property owner or a person practicing in the area of property management. 
   12.   A representative of the general business community. 
   13.   A person qualified in the area of historical preservation. 
   14.   A person, preferably with a disability, who is knowledgeable about disability access 
regulations. 
   15.   Three at-large members who may, but need not, possess technical skills or knowledge. 
   The terms “registered" and “licensed” shall be understood to mean registered or licensed by the 
State of California. 
   The Building Inspection Commission shall make appointments after giving careful 
consideration to nominations made by technical associations and other organizations, including 
the San Francisco Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, the Structural Engineers 
Association of Northern California, the Society of Fire Protection Engineers, the San Francisco 
District of the Associated General Contractors of California, American Society of Heating, 
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning 
Contractors National Association, San Francisco Bay Area Chapter of the National Association 
of the Remodeling Industry, National Electrical Contractors Association, the Residential 
Builders Association of San Francisco, Inc., the San Francisco Chapter of the Building Owners 
and Managers Association of California, the San Francisco Chamber of Commerce and the 
Foundation for San Francisco’s Architectural Heritage. 
   The following shall constitute ex officio members of the Code Advisory Committee without 
vote: The Building Official of the Department, who shall act as Secretary of the Code Advisory 
Committee, and the Fire Marshal. 
105A.4.4 Procedure. The Code Advisory Committee shall establish reasonable rules for its own 
procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this code and the Charter of the City and 

--- Page 41 ---
39 
County of San Francisco. The Code Advisory Committee, by a majority vote, shall choose its 
officers, which shall consist of the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson. 
105A.4.4.1 Quorum. A majority of the voting members of the Code Advisory Committee shall 
constitute a quorum. Any action taken by the Code Advisory Committee shall require an 
affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the Code Advisory Committee members present 
and voting. No member of the Code Advisory Committee shall pass upon any question in which 
the member, the firm that employs the member or any corporation in which the member is a 
shareholder, holds a financial interest. 
105A.4.4.2 Meetings. Meetings of the Code Advisory Committee shall be scheduled at a regular 
place and time but not less than once monthly. The exact time and place shall be established by 
the Code Advisory Committee in its rules and regulations of procedure. All meetings of the Code 
Advisory Committee shall be open to the public. 
105A.4.4.3 Agenda and record. The Code Advisory Committee shall arrange for the 
maintenance of a record of its agenda, actions and recommendations which shall be available to 
the public upon request for the cost of reproduction. 
105A.5 Reserved. 
105A.6 Structural Advisory Committee. 
105A.6.1 Establishment. There is hereby created a three-member Structural Advisory 
Committee, to advise the Building Official on matters pertaining to the design and construction 
of buildings with special features or special design procedures. Upon request by the Building 
Official, the engineer of record for such a project shall demonstrate to the Structural Advisory 
Committee how the structural concepts, designs, details, erection methods and quality control 
will produce a structure that would meet the intent of Section 101A.2. 
105A.6.2 Members. For consideration of each building with such special features, the Structural 
Advisory Committee shall consist of members who are knowledgeable in the structural 
engineering and construction issues presented by those special features. Members shall be 
selected from a list of qualified engineers submitted by the Structural Engineers Association of 
Northern California and approved by the Building Official. One member shall be selected by the 
Building Official, one member shall be selected by the owner, and the third member shall be 
selected jointly. Compensation of the Structural Advisory Committee members shall be by the 
owner. However, when the project for which Committee review is required is located in the 
Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area, as defined by Building Code Section 106A.4.1.2 or 
the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area as defined by Building Code Section 106A.4.1.3 
or is subject to Committee review pursuant to the Slope Protection Act, Building Code 
Section 106A.4.1.4.5, (a) the Committee shall consist of a structural engineer, a geologist and a 
geotechnical engineer; (b) the Committee shall consult with an architect, who shall be a voting 
member of the Committee; (c) the selection of the Committee members shall be as follows: one 
member shall be selected jointly by the Building Official and the Director of Public Works, one 
member shall be selected solely by the Building Official and one member shall be selected by the 
Building Official and the owner from recommendations made by interested persons, including 
but not limited to residents of the neighborhood surrounding the project location; and (d) to the 
extent feasible, the Committee members should be selected from a list submitted by the 
Structural Engineers Association of Northern California. 
105A.6.3 Report. The Structural Advisory Committee shall submit to the Building Official a 
written report which shall include professional opinions concerning, but not limited to, the 
following: 

--- Page 42 ---
40 
   1.   The validity and appropriateness of the structural design concepts and criteria. 
   2.   An evaluation of the structural design of the building or structure to determine its capability 
to perform satisfactorily beyond the elastic stresses stipulated by the code, with sufficient 
redundancy to accommodate overloads or failures of specific structural components. 
   3.   The constructability of proposed structural details and erection methods. 
   4.   The sufficiency of the proposed inspection, testing and monitoring to be provided during 
prior to and during construction. 
105A.7 Reserved. 
105A.8 Appellate authority of the Building Inspection Commission. The appellate authority 
of the Building Inspection Commission is as set forth in Section D3.750-4 of the San Francisco 
Charter, as implemented by Chapter 77 of the San Francisco Administrative Code. 
 
SECTION 106A – PERMITS 
106A.1 Permits required. Except as specified in Section 106A.2, no building or structure 
regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, 
improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or 
structure has first been obtained from the Building Official. 
   When considering an application for a permit for development of “dwellings” as defined 
in Chapter 87 of the San Francisco Administrative Code, the Department of Building Inspection 
shall comply with that chapter which requires, among other things, that the Department of 
Building Inspection not base any decision regarding the development of “dwellings” in which 
“protected class” members are likely to reside on information which may be discriminatory to 
any member of a “protected class” (as all such terms are defined in Chapter 87 of the San 
Francisco Administrative Code). 
106A.1.1 Separate permits required. Where buildings or structures are constructed on top of a 
base structure, and such structures are likely to have their own addresses or functional identities, 
separate permits shall be required for the base structure and for each of the top buildings or 
structures. 
106A.1.2 Permit and fees for grading, excavation, or filling of land. The valuation for the 
permit shall be based on the volume of material to be handled, and on a cost schedule posted in 
the Department. The permit issuance and plan review fees shall be the same as those for new 
construction. See Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees, and Table 1A-B – Other 
Building Permit and Plan Review Fees. See Chapter 33 and Appendix J for general grading 
provisions. 
106A.1.3 Permits and fees for subsidewalk space. A building permit shall be obtained for 
construction of subsidewalk space. The fee for said permit shall be the fee set for building 
permits. See Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – for applicable fees. 
   Permits for the use of subsidewalk space, except for subsurface space used to connect a 
building, structure or property with the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit district facilities, 
shall be granted after approval by the Building Official and the City Engineer. Permission for the 
use of subsurface space to connect with the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District 
facilities, shall be granted only as set forth in Section 106A.1.3.1. The City may reserve any part 
of the subsidewalk space for its own use or the use of the public. The Board of Supervisors 
reserves the right to suspend or annul the privilege of maintaining such subsidewalk space or to 
exact a license or rental for the use thereof. The granting of a permit to use the subsidewalk 
space shall carry with it the right to excavate the space and to build the necessary retaining walls. 

--- Page 43 ---
41 
If the street in front of the building is paved, a deposit will be required of the subsidewalk space. 
See Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – for required deposit. The deposit will 
be refunded to the permittee upon the endorsement of the permit issued therefor and a certificate 
from the Department of Public Works, Bureau of Engineering, certifying to the satisfactory 
condition of such roadway at the end of two years after the time the pavement was restored. 
Should the permittee fail to restore any pavement, the Director of the Department of Public 
Works may, after 10 days’ notice in writing posted on the building, restore the pavement and 
deduct the cost of such restoration from the deposit. In lieu of the deposit required herein, a bond 
in the amount of the deposit may be accepted in the manner set forth in Article 8 of the San 
Francisco Public Works Code. 
   No permit shall hereafter be issued by any officer, board or commission of San Francisco to 
make use of the subsidewalk space within the street lines of Market Street between Steuart Street 
and Castro Street, except a permit may be granted for the use as subsidewalk space for the 
following: 
   1.   The space lying contiguous to the property line and extending along a line parallel thereto 
and up to 22 feet distant therefrom wherever such space is located in Market Street between 
Steuart Street and Van Ness Avenue. 
   2.   The space lying contiguous to the property line and extending along a line parallel thereto 
and up to 10 feet distant therefrom wherever such space is located in Market Street between Van 
Ness Avenue and Castro Street. 
   Due consideration shall be given to the needs and requirements for the use of subsidewalk 
space by public utilities. 
   The remainder of the subsidewalk space is hereby expressly reserved for public use. 
106A.1.3.1 Subsurface connection to San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District 
facilities. Permission to use subsurface space to connect any building or structure or premises 
with the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District facilities shall be first obtained from the 
Board of Supervisors of San Francisco by resolution, prior to filing a permit to construct the 
connection. The Board of Supervisors reserves the right to suspend or annul the permission to 
use any subsurface space to connect any building, structure or premises with the San Francisco 
Bay Area Rapid Transit District facilities or to exact a license or rental for the use thereof. Upon 
the Board of Supervisors passing a resolution approving the connection, an application for a 
building permit to construct the connection shall be filed with the Department. The application, 
together with plans and specifications, shall be referred for approval to the Planning Department, 
the Department of Public Works, Bureau of Engineering, and any other department having 
jurisdiction. If approved, the approvals shall be endorsed in writing on the application by the 
respective departments and bureaus. The Department shall issue a building permit when the 
application has been approved by the Building Official, and upon payment of all required permit 
fees. In addition to the building permit and plan checking fees, the deposit required in 
Section 106A.1.3 shall also be paid to the Department and refunded as set forth in 
Section 106A.1.3, provided that all work under the building permit has been satisfactorily 
completed. 
106A.1.4 Permits and fees for moving buildings. 
106A.1.4.1 General. The applicant for a permit for moving a building shall pay a permit fee for 
documentation and inspection of the moving work. See Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty 
Permit Fees – for applicable fee. A permit and plan review fee for work required at the building’s 

--- Page 44 ---
42 
new site shall be per Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees, and Table 1A-B – 
Building Permit Application and Plan Review Fees. 
106A.1.4.2 Permit application for new site. Before a permit may be issued for moving a 
building, a building permit must be obtained for the necessary alterations and additions to the 
building on the new site. The application for the alterations at the new site is to be accompanied 
by complete plans showing floor plans, elevations, plot plan, and such other information as 
contained in Section 106A.3.3 as may be required by the Building Official. 
106A.1.5 Permit and fees for demolition of buildings. A permit shall be required for 
demolishing any structure. See Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – and Section 
110, Table 1A-L – Public Information – for applicable fees. See Section 3303 for general 
requirements. 
106A.1.6 Permits and fees for chimneys, flues. A flue permit shall be required to erect, 
construct, alter or repair any chimney or flue except when it is a Type 1 grease hood or is 
constructed of masonry. A separate flue permit shall be required for each flue or chimney. 
Grease and masonry flues and chimneys shall require building permits per Section 106A. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – for applicable fees. 
106A.1.6.1 Permits for boiler flues. A boiler flue permit shall be required to: 
   1.   Install, alter, or replace any boiler flue or section thereof; 
   2.   Install any approved type heat reclaimer or other approved type device within a boiler gas 
flue. 
106A.1.7 Permits and fees for temporary buildings or structures. A permit is required for the 
construction and erection of temporary reviewing stands, bleachers, grandstands and other 
miscellaneous structures. The Building Official may require that any temporary building or 
structure be inspected by a registered civil engineer and found to be in compliance with all 
provisions of this code before it is permitted to be used by the public. See Section 110A, Table 
1A-GF – Specialty Permit Fees – for applicable fee. 
106A.1.8 Garage door permits and fees. A garage door permit shall be required for the 
installation of such doors in existing buildings. See Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit 
Fees – for applicable fee. 
   The provisions of this section shall not apply where structural alterations are made, or are 
required in connection with the installation of garage doors. This section also shall not apply to 
the alteration, repair, or replacement of garage doors in public garages. In all these cases, the 
permit and fee requirements of Sections 106A, 107A and 110A shall apply. 
106A.1.9 Permits and fees for signs. 
106A.1.9.1 General. A sign regulated under Chapter 31 shall not be erected or altered until a 
sign permit has been obtained for such work. Application for a permit shall be made at the 
Department on supplied forms. Where signs are illuminated by electric lighting, a separate 
permit shall be obtained as required in the Electrical Code. Replacement of copy on the face of a 
sign, without affecting the structural members or the attachment to a building, structure, or the 
ground, shall not require a sign permit. 
106A.1.9.2 Permit fees. Permit fees for signs shall be based upon job valuation. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees – for applicable fees. 
106A.1.9.3 Plan review fees for signs. See Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees – 
for applicable fee. 
106A.1.10 Permit and fees for residential elevators and lifts. 

--- Page 45 ---
43 
106A.1.10.1 General. An elevator or lift regulated under Chapter 30 shall not be installed or 
altered until a building permit has been obtained for such work. 
106A.1.10.2 Fees. The permit fees and plan review fees shall be those required in 
Section 110A, Tables 1A-A and 1A-B. The valuation shall be based on the total installation, 
including those portions, if any, which are regulated by the State. 
106A.1.10.3 Exemption. Elevators regulated by the State of California are exempt from permits 
and the provisions of this code. However, the elevator shafts and enclosures, and any structural 
alterations or strengthening work to accommodate the installation, shall comply with the permit 
and other requirements of this code. 
106A.1.11 Permit and fees for boilers. A separate building permit shall be required for a new 
boiler installation or replacement except where a building permit has been issued which included 
such work, the fee for which shall be the minimum fee per Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building 
Permit Fees. In addition, a permit to operate the boiler is required and shall be charged a fee 
based on the schedule in Section 110A, Table 1A-CM – Boiler Fees. The fee for renewal of a 
permit to operate shall be based on the same schedule. Such fee shall be paid whether or not a 
permit to operate is issued. All fees shall be paid at the time of application for permits. Any 
additional fees billed will be increased to twice the billed amount when payment is not received 
by the Department within 30 days of billing. Failure to pay required fees will result in 
cancellation of the issued permit to operate. See Chapter 10 of the Mechanical Code for boiler 
requirements. 
106A.1.12 Permit and fees for change in occupancy or use. Whenever a change in occupancy 
or use, as defined in Section 302 of this Code, is made, a building permit shall be required to 
legalize the changed occupancy or use. The fee shall be the minimum fee required for filing for a 
permit and must be secured prior to the change of occupancy. 
   Building permit applications for a change of use shall not require plans prepared by a 
registered design professional, provided all of the following apply: 
   (a)   the previously established use designation is in A (Assembly), B (Business), and M 
(Mercantile) occupancy classifications and remains within that classification; 
   (b)   the occupant load remains the same or decreases; 
   (c)   there are no alterations, as defined by section 202 of this Code; 
   (d)   the tenant space does not require changes to the mechanical, electrical, or plumbing 
systems; and 
   (e)   the tenant will not be introducing new kitchen, service bar design or related equipment in 
the space. 
   In the event any alteration work is required, the alteration permit with plans shall be considered 
sufficient for this requirement and no additional permit will be required or additional fee required 
for the change in use or occupancy except as set forth in Section 109A.8. 
106A.1.13 Permits and fees for construction of an impervious surface in a front yard 
setback; penalties for violation of requirements. 
   (a)   General. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to commence or proceed 
with the construction of an impervious surface in a front yard setback area, other than a driveway 
as defined in Planning Code Section 136(c)(30), unless a permit is first obtained. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-GF – Specialty Permit Fees – for applicable fee. 
   (b)   Referral to Planning Department. The Department shall refer all applications for a 
permit pursuant to this Section 106A.1.13 to the Planning Department for a determination 
regarding the proposed construction’s compliance with Sections 132(g) and 136(c)(30) of the 

--- Page 46 ---
44 
Planning Code. The Department may not issue the permit unless Planning determines the 
proposed construction to be compliant with the Planning Code requirements. 
   (c)   Verification of compliance during inspections. In performing the inspections required 
under Section 108A.1 of this Code, the inspector shall also verify that an impervious surface has 
not been constructed in the front yard setback area in violation of this Section 106A.1.13. If the 
inspector finds that there is a violation of Section 106A.1.13, the violation shall be required to be 
corrected under that existing permit. 
   (d)   Penalties for violation. 
      1.   Notice of Municipal Code Violation (“NOV”). The Department shall issue an NOV 
pursuant to Section 102A.4 of this Code to the owner of the property determined to be in 
violation of the provisions of subsection (a) above. The NOV shall require the owner or the 
owner’s authorized representative to apply for and obtain a permit to bring the existing surface in 
the front yard setback area into compliance with current Municipal Code requirements, including 
but not limited to the Building and Planning Codes. 
      2.   Investigation Fees. Violations of this Section 106A.1.13 shall be subject to the fees set 
forth in Table 1A-K of this Code for either work without permit or work exceeding the scope of 
the approved permit. 
      3.   Civil and criminal penalties. Any person, including the owner or the owner’s authorized 
representative, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or resists or 
opposes the execution of the provisions of this Section 106A.1.13 shall be subject to the civil 
penalty of up to $500 per day and the criminal penalties that are set forth in Section 103A of this 
Code. 
      4.   Costs of Abatement. In addition to any monetary penalties authorized by 
Section 103A of this Code, the Department shall be entitled to recover its costs of abatement 
pursuant to Section 102A.7(d). 
106A.1.14. Damaged apartment houses where residential occupants have been displaced, 
preliminary information and Action Plan required. Whenever an Apartment House, as 
defined in the Housing Code, has been damaged by fire or other emergency that results in the 
displacement of residential occupants, the property owner shall submit to the Department’s 
Building Inspection Division, with a copy to the Housing Inspection Division, the following 
information and an Action Plan within the timeframe specified. The Department shall include a 
statement in all applicable Notices of Violation issued pursuant to this Section that allowing the 
residential occupants to retrieve their personal property in a safe manner through a visit 
supervised by the property owner’s engineer, general contractor, or other industry professional 
for a short duration is not in conflict with the issued Notice of Violation. 
106A.1.14.1. Information submittal. Within 72 hours of the posting of a Notice of Violation on 
the subject site, the property owner shall provide the following information in writing: 
   (a)   a description of the steps taken and the methods used to stabilize and secure the subject 
building and premises, including but not limited to the following, as appropriate: (1) fencing the 
building perimeter, (2) securely barricading all windows, openings, and other points of entry to 
the building from the outside, (3) assessing the property at least weekly to ensure that no 
unauthorized entry is occurring and that any fencing and barricades are secure and remain in 
place, and (4) providing 24-hour security; 
   (b)   if the City has determined that the subject building, or portions thereof, is unsafe for 
occupancy, a description of the steps taken and the methods used to either secure the personal 
property of the residential occupants or allow them to retrieve their personal property, including 

--- Page 47 ---
45 
but not limited to the following: (1) fencing the building perimeter, barricading all points of 
entry, or taking the other steps listed in Section 106A.1.14.1(a) above, and (2) obtaining the 
recommendations of a structural engineer or other appropriate consultant for allowing the 
residential occupants access to the building or undamaged portions thereof, for the purpose of 
obtaining their personal belongings; and 
   (c)   the name and contact information of the owner or an agent of the owner who is able to 
respond to questions and concerns from the residential occupants and others. 
106A.1.14.2. Action Plan submittal. Within 30 days from release of the scene by the Fire 
Department and other emergency responders, the property owner shall submit an Action Plan in 
the form required by the Department that contains the following elements: 
   (a)   a description of the steps taken and the methods used to stabilize and secure the subject 
building and premises, including supporting documentation by a structural engineer or other 
industry professional as specified in the Notice of Violation, including but not limited to the 
following, as appropriate: (1) fencing the building perimeter, (2) securely barricading all 
windows, openings, and other points of entry to the building from the outside, (3) assessing the 
property at least weekly to ensure that no unauthorized entry is occurring and that any fencing 
and barricades are secure and remain in place, and (4) providing 24-hour security; 
   (b)   a summary of the extent of fire or water damage to the building, describing with 
specificity the damage to individual dwelling units that were occupied prior to the damage by 
fire or other emergency; 
   (c)   a description of the repairs necessary to bring the building into compliance with any 
Notices of Violation issued by the Department of Building Inspection, Fire Department, or 
Health Department; 
   (d)   a general schedule and description of the permits that will be filed to comply with (c) 
above; 
   (e)   the contact information of the individuals who will perform the work under (c) above, 
which information shall be updated as necessary and kept current; 
   (f)   an estimated date (month and year) when the displaced residential occupants can reoccupy 
the building. The estimated date shall be within a time reasonably necessary to accomplish the 
required repairs; 
   (g)   proof that the owner has complied with the notice requirements of Section 106A.1.14.3; 
and 
   (h)   information about prior complaints, notices of violation, and the status of their abatement 
or compliance with code requirements. 
106A.1.14.3. Updating information. Within 90 days from the submission of the Action Plan to 
the Department required by Section 106A .1.14.2, and every 90 days thereafter, the property 
owner shall provide to the Department any new or corrected information concerning items (a) 
through (h) in Section 106A .1.14.2 above, including but not limited to any change to the 
estimated date by which the displaced residential occupants can reoccupy the building. 
106A.1.14.4. Notice of filing of Action Plan. Within 72 hours of the filing of the required 
Action Plan with the Department, the property owner shall (a) post a notice of the filing in a 
prominent location at the building site and (b) mail or personally deliver a notice of the filing to 
each displaced residential occupant at their last known location. 
106A.1.14.5. Re-inspection of the premises. Following a fire that has resulted in the 
displacement of residential occupants, the Department shall re-inspect the premises at least every 
90 days until the property owner has responded to and abated all pending Notices of Violation. If 

--- Page 48 ---
46 
the property owner does not give the Department access to the premises necessary to conduct 
such re-inspection(s), the Department shall request assistance from the City Attorney to gain 
access to the premises or take such other action as the City Attorney deems appropriate. 
106A.1.15 Solar energy systems. 
106A.1.15.1 Definitions. For purposes of this Section 106A .1.15, the following definitions 
apply: 
   “Solar energy system,” as defined in California Government Code Section 65850.5(j) and 
Civil Code Section 801.5(a), means either of the following: 
   1.   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for 
the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric 
generation, or water heating. 
   2.   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the 
collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or 
cooling, or for water heating. 
   “Small residential rooftop solar energy system,” as defined in California Government Code 
Section 65850.5(j), means a solar energy system that: 
   1.   is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal; 
   2.   is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; 
   3.   has a solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height 
in applicable City codes; 
   4.   conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as 
adopted or amended by the City and County of San Francisco; and 
   5.   conforms to all state and City health and safety standards. 
106A.1.15.2 Permit and fees. An electrical permit is required to install or alter a solar energy 
system. See Section 110A, Table 1A-E – Electrical Permit Fee Issuance and Inspection Fee 
Schedule for applicable fee. The fee for a building, plumbing, mechanical, or other permit, if 
required, shall be the fee established in the Section 110A fee tables for that permit. 
   EXCEPTION: An electrical permit is not required to make minor alterations to an existing 
solar energy system unless the alterations materially change the size, type, or components of the 
system in such a way as to require new permitting. 
106A.1.15.3 General requirements. 
   1.   A solar energy system and its installation shall comply with Article 690 and other 
applicable sections of the Electrical Code, and any applicable sections of the Mechanical Code, 
Plumbing Code, Building Code, or other codes enforced by the Department of Building 
Inspection. 
   2.   A solar energy system for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and 
performance standards for such systems established by the Electrical Code, the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters 
Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety 
and reliability. 
   3.   A solar energy system used for heating water in single-family residences or for heating 
water in swimming pools shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the 
Plumbing and Mechanical Codes. 
   4.   A solar energy system proposed for installation on a building that is (a) a designated 
landmark, (b) a contributory resource in a designated historic district, or (c) on the National 
Register or State Register, or deemed eligible for listing on the National or State Register, 

--- Page 49 ---
47 
requires a building permit and shall be reviewed by the Planning Department to ensure 
compliance with Article 10 of the Planning Code and, if required, referral to the Historic 
Preservation Commission pursuant to the provisions of Section 1005 of the Planning Code. 
   5.   Installation of a solar hot water system requires a plumbing permit. 
106A.1.15.4 Permit application submittal documentation; expedited review. Except as set 
forth in Section 106A.1.15.3(4) above, upon submittal of the application and the documentation 
listed in paragraphs 1 through 4 below, an application for a permit to install a solar energy 
system is deemed complete and eligible for expedited review in accordance with the 
Department’s Priority Permit Processing Guidelines. (See Administrative Bulletin 004.) 
   1.   a standard plan contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting 
Guidebook and adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research or other plan 
acceptable to the Building Official; 
   2.   the information required by the checklists contained in the most current version of the 
California Solar Permitting Guidebook and adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and 
Research; 
   3.   verification, using standard engineering techniques, that the support structure for the solar 
energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads 
associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
   4.   verification, using standard electrical inspection techniques, that the existing electrical 
system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring, as well as main panel and 
subpanel sizes, are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to 
carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
   The application, and the documentation required by this Section 106A.1.15.4, may be 
submitted electronically. 
106A.1.15.5 Permit review and issuance. A permit for a solar energy system that is 4 kilowatts 
or less is issued over the counter if the application meets all requirements and a public health or 
safety issue has not been identified. A larger system requires review by the Electrical Division, 
and a review by other Divisions may be required depending on the system. An application for 
installation of a solar energy system on a building that is (a) a designated landmark, (b) a 
contributory resource in a designated historic district, or (c) on the National Register or State 
Register, or deemed eligible for listing on the National or State Register, requires review by the 
Planning Department to ensure compliance with Article 10 of the Planning Code and, if required, 
referral to the Historic Preservation Commission pursuant to the requirements of Section 1005 of 
the Planning Code. 
106A.1.15.6 Inspections. Only one inspection is required for a small residential rooftop energy 
system that is eligible for expedited review under Section 106A.1.15.4. An inspection will be 
scheduled within three business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window. If 
the system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is required. 
106A.1.15.7 Separate approval required to connect a Solar Energy System to the electricity 
grid. Approval of a permit for installation of a solar energy system does not authorize the 
applicant to connect the system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is 
responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
106A.1.15.8 Denial of permit; permit conditions. Pursuant to Government Code Section 
65850.5(c), if the Department or other agency of the City denies an application for a solar energy 
system use permit, it shall make written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, 
that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or 

--- Page 50 ---
48 
safety or a historic resource and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the 
specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential 
feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. Any conditions imposed on the permit 
shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety at the 
lowest cost possible. 
106A.1.16 Electric Vehicle (EV) Supply Equipment; permit and fee. An electrical permit 
obtained by a California state licensed Electrical Contractor is required to install Electric Vehicle 
Supply Equipment (EVSE) defined in Section 202 of this Code, and the alteration or 
modification of any portion of the electrical system on the property. See Section 110A, Table 
1A-E – Electrical Permit Fee Issuance and Inspection Fee Schedule for the applicable fees. 
   EXCEPTION: A permit is not required to install a Residential Electrical Vehicle Charger 
when a plug in type charger is utilizing a previously approved receptacle outlet. 
106A.1.16.1 General requirements. 
   1.   The EV Charging Station and its installation shall comply with Article 625 and other 
applicable sections of the Electrical Code, and all applicable sections of the Mechanical Code, 
Building Code, and Fire Code. The installation shall also meet any safety and performance 
standards established by the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical 
Manufacturers Association, accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, 
and the California Public Utilities Commission that the Building Official determines shall apply. 
   2.   New construction and certain major alterations, as those terms are defined in Section 202 of 
the Green Building Code, are subject to the requirements of Sections 4.103.3.3 4.103.3 
and 5.103.3 and other applicable sections of the Green Building Code, per Ordinance No. 92-17, 
enacted in April 2017. 
   3.   All electrical materials, devices, fittings, and associated equipment shall be listed by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
   4.   Level 2 EVSE shall be connected and fastened in place per the manufacturer’s instructions 
and Section 625.44 of the Electrical Code. The anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-
mounted stations shall comply with the Building Code and Electrical Code. 
   5.   For indoor locations, the coupling means of the EVSE shall be stored at a height of not less 
than 18 inches and not more than 48 inches above the finished floor level. 
   6.   For outdoor locations, the coupling means of the EVSE shall be stored or located at a 
height of not less than 24 inches above grade level. 
106A.1.16.2 Application submittal requirements. 
   1.   Consistent with existing procedures, the Department shall continue to allow a California 
state licensed Electrical Contractor registered with the Department to obtain an electrical permit 
for installation of electrical materials, devices, fittings, and associated equipment. Where the 
scope of a project, including installation of an EV Charger, solely requires an electrical permit, 
such a permit shall continue to be available electronically and over the counter to licensed 
Electrical Contractors registered with the Department. The Department shall publish guidance 
clarifying conditions where an electrical permit is sufficient. 
   2.   For projects which require additional review or permits, the Department shall publish 
guidance clarifying when any or all of the following are required in order for an EV Charging 
Station permit to be complete. The application, and the information and documentation required 
by this Section 106A.1.16.2, may be submitted electronically. 

--- Page 51 ---
49 
      (a)   an electrical plan and calculations signed and stamped by either a California registered 
Electrical Engineer or the licensed Electrical Contractor who is responsible for design and 
installation of the system; 
      (b)   a line diagram that includes all relevant information regarding the electrical charger, 
panels, raceways, wire types and sizes, utility service main breaker ampacity, and utility service 
voltage; 
      (c)   if applicable, identification of the type of EV Charger being installed; 
      (d)   current manufacturer specification sheets for major components of the system; 
      (e)   information from the manufacturer indicating whether or not ventilation is required; 
      (f)   if ventilation is required, a mechanical plan signed and stamped by either a California 
registered Mechanical Engineer or the licensed Mechanical Contractor responsible for the 
ventilation design; 
      (g)   a site plan approximately to scale that includes the locations of new and existing panels, 
meter, charging unit, and associated items; 
      (h)   a completed Department service load calculation form; 
      (i)   an electrical panel schedule; and 
      (j)   listing and labeling information from an approved nationally recognized testing 
laboratory. 
106A.1.16.3 Inspections. Inspections by the Electrical Division are required for EV Charging 
Station installations, and for any alteration or modification of the electrical system on the 
property, including the installation of EVSE. 
106A.1.17 Mixed-Fuel Buildings.  The Building Official shall not issue permits for construction 
of any new Mixed-Fuel Building that submitted an initial application on or after June 1, 2021. 
Permits for new construction, the initial applications for which were submitted on or after that 
date, may only be obtained for All-Electric Buildings or Projects. New construction that includes 
natural gas infrastructure solely to serve appliances covered by the Federal Energy Policy and 
Conservation Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6201 et seq.) and that complies with the Design Guidelines for 
Electric-Ready Buildings published by the Department of Building Inspection shall be 
considered an All-Electric Building or Project for purposes of this subsection 106A.1.17. For 
purposes of this subsection, the initial application shall be the first site or building permit 
application associated with the project. 
   EXCEPTIONS: The Building Official may issue a permit for construction of a new Mixed-
Fuel Building in the following circumstances, and provided that the building shall be Electric-
Ready as specified in the Design Guidelines for Electric-Ready Buildings published by the 
Department of Building Inspection: 
      (1)   Upon the Building Official’s finding that constructing an All-Electric Building or 
Project is physically or technically infeasible and that a modification pursuant to section 
104A.2.7 is warranted. Financial considerations shall not be a sufficient basis to determine 
physical or technical infeasibility. Modifications from this section 106A.1.17 shall only be issued 
under this exception where the Building Official finds: sufficient evidence was submitted to 
substantiate the infeasibility of an All-Electric Building or Project design; the installation of 
natural gas piping systems, fixtures and/or infrastructure is strictly limited to the system and area 
of the building for which All-Electric Building or Project design is infeasible; and that the 
project’s modified design provides equivalent health, safety and fire-protection to All-Electric 
Building or Project design; or 

--- Page 52 ---
50 
      (2)   The Building Official may issue a permit for a new Mixed Fuel Building that includes 
an area specifically designated for occupancy by a commercial food service establishment (A-2 
Occupancy) that is a Mixed-Fuel Building solely because it provides gas piping systems, fixtures 
and/or infrastructure exclusively for cooking equipment within the designated commercial food 
service area where the initial application was submitted prior to January 1, 2022. 
         (i)   For initial applications submitted on or after this date, the Building Official may issue a 
permit for such a new Mixed-Fuel Building—that is a Mixed -Fuel Building solely because it 
provides gas piping systems, fixtures and/or infrastructure exclusively for cooking equipment 
within the designated commercial food service area—upon finding that the applicant has 
submitted sufficient evidence that such gas systems are necessary for the specific commercial 
food service establishment that will operate the food service area. Applicants may appeal 
determinations made by the Building Official to the Board of Examiners, pursuant to section 
105A.1. 
   REPORTING: No later than July 15, 2022 and annually thereafter until 2025, the Building 
Official shall provide to the Department of Environment a report listing the status of all permits 
granted or in process to construct a new Mixed-Fuel Building pursuant to the above exceptions. 
The reports shall be cumulative and shall include a brief description of the circumstances for 
which the applicant seeks or has been granted an exception. 
106A.1.17.1 Conversion to Mixed-Fuel Buildings. The Building Official shall not issue 
permits that would convert an All-Electric Building or Project into a Mixed-Fuel Building where 
the initial application was submitted after June 1, 2021. 
106A.1.17.2 Municipal New Construction. The provisions in section 106A.1.17 do not apply to 
Municipal New Construction as defined by Chapter 7 of the Environment Code that are subject 
to Section 706 of the Environment Code. 
106A.1.18. Labor Compliance Bonds for Certain Residential Projects.  As the terms 
“Project” and “First Construction Document” are defined in Labor and Employment Code 
Section 81.3, and may be amended from time to time, a First Construction Document shall not be 
issued to a Project that filed an application for a building permit or a complete Preliminary 
Permit Application pursuant to California Government Code Section 65941.1 on or after the 
effective date of Labor and Employment Code Article 81 unless the Department has received 
written confirmation from the Controller that the surety bond required under Labor and 
Employment Code Section 81.5(a) has been filed. 
106A.1.19 State-Mandated Accessory Dwelling Unit Program.  California Government Code 
Sections 66314 and 66333 require expedited, ministerial consideration of Accessory Dwelling 
Units (“ADUs”) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (“JADUs”) that meet the requirements of 
Planning Code Section 207.2 . 
106A.1.19.1 Permit Application Review and Approval. The City shall approve or deny an 
application for a permit to construct an ADU or JADU on a lot containing an existing dwelling 
within 60 days from receipt of the complete application if the proposed construction fully 
complies with the requirements set forth in Planning Code Section 207.2 and any other 
applicable requirements. If the applicant requests a delay, the 60-day time period shall be tolled 
for the period of the delay. If the City has not approved or denied the completed application 
within 60 days, the application shall be deemed approved. 
106A.1.19.2 Notice of Garage Demolition. Written and posted notice shall not be required for 
the demolition of a detached garage that is to be replaced with an ADU, unless the property is 

--- Page 53 ---
51 
located within a historic or conservation district pursuant to Article 10 or Article 11 of the 
Planning Code. 
106A.2 Work exempt from permit. [Section 105.2 of the California Building Code.] 
Exemptions from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization 
for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other 
laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. A building permit shall not be required for the following: 
   1.   One-story detached accessory buildings or structures used as tool and storage sheds, 
playhouses and similar uses, provided the projected roof area does not exceed 100 square feet 
(9.29 m2). 
   2.   Fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) high located at the rear and side lot lines at the rear of 
the property, and all fences not over 3 feet (914.4 mm) in height. 
   3.   Amusement devices not on fixed foundations. 
   4.   Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) high. 
   5.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of 
the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A 
liquids. 
   6.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons 
(18927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2.1. 
   7.   Platforms, sidewalks, walks and driveways when not part of an exit, and not more than 30 
inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below and which, for 
residential buildings required to be accessible to persons with disabilities, are not part of a 
required accessible route. 
   8.   Painting, papering and similar finish work. 
   9.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
   10.   Minor repairs to existing interior plaster or wallboard, except when part of a fire-resistive 
assembly. 
   11.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy in which 
the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 
gallons (18927 L). 
   12.   State-owned buildings under the jurisdiction of the state fire marshal. Unless otherwise 
exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above-
exempted items. 
   13.   Reroofing without the installation, repair or removal of roof sheathing, if the total surface 
area of the roof reroofed in any 12-month period does not exceed 25 percent of the entire surface 
area of the roof. 
   14.   Surface mounting of readily removable materials on interior walls. 
   15.   Work performed on structures owned and occupied by the Federal or State government. 
This exemption shall not apply to privately operated structures erected on government-owned 
land, or to privately owned land or structures leased to the Federal or State government, or to 
structures owned and operated by State educational institutions unless such structures are owned 
and used exclusively for educational purposes or other uses related to the institution’s 
educational purposes, such as student cafeterias or dormitories. 
   16.   Installations or replacement of floor coverings in areas other than bathrooms and toilet 
rooms not requiring the removal of existing required flooring. 
   17.   Repair and replacement of glazing in conformity with this code, and provided wire glass 
shall be replaced in kind. 

--- Page 54 ---
52 
   18.   Replacement of doors, except garage doors, in all occupancies, provided they are not part 
of fire-resistive assemblies required by this code. 
   19.   Work performed on structures owned or leased by the City and County of San Francisco 
where the construction or modification of said structure is financed in whole or in part by the 
issuance of lease revenue bonds prior to July 1, 1989. 
   20.   See Section 3107.1.1 for exempt signs. 
   21.   See Section J103.2 for grading permit exemptions. 
   22.   See Section 106A.1.10.3 for Elevators regulated by the state exemption. 
   23.   Construction or repair of a homeless shelter located on City owned or leased land during a 
declared shelter crisis where the work complies with all the following alternative approval 
process conditions: (a) the City agency proposing the construction or repair submits written 
notice to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors of the agency’s intention to invoke this 
subsection 106A.2(23) and 60 days elapse without the City enacting an ordinance restricting the 
agency’s invocation of this subsection; (b) the City agency proposing the siting, construction, or 
repair submits all information required under Section 106A.3.1 to the Department; (c) the 
Department routes the information regarding the proposed work to all bureaus, departments, or 
agencies that are required to review and approve such construction or repair as required under 
applicable ordinances and laws, including the Fire Marshal, Chief Harbor Engineer of the Port of 
San Francisco (if applicable), and the Departments of Public Works, Planning, and Public 
Health; (d) the Department receives written confirmation from the Directors of each applicable 
bureau, department, and agency that the proposed work complies with all ordinances and laws 
subject to their authority; (e) the Department confirms that the proposed work complies with all 
applicable provisions of this Building Code and that the Department has received written 
confirmation of compliance from all applicable bureaus, departments, and agencies; and (f) the 
Department issues a written determination of compliance that contains all the information 
required under Section 106A.4. 
    24.   A small residential rooftop solar energy system, as defined in Section 106A.1.15.1, 
installed on a building that is not (a) a designated landmark, (b) a contributory resource in a 
designated historic district, or (c) on the National Register or State Register, or deemed eligible 
for listing on the National or State Register. An electrical permit or other permit may be required 
depending on the system. 
    25.   Use of a hotel or motel for Interim Housing use, as defined and authorized in Planning 
Code Section 202.15, as may be amended from time to time, where the Department confirms the 
hotel or motel meets the minimum fire and safety requirements set forth in Section PQ111 of 
Appendix PQ to this Code. The use of a hotel or motel or any units within a hotel or motel for 
Interim Housing shall not change the underlying occupancy classification of the property. 
    26.   The reestablishment of a Hotel or Motel use pursuant to Planning Code Section 202.15(h) 
for any such use that participated in the City’s Shelter-In-Place Hotel Program and was operated 
as a shelter. Such reestablishment of the Hotel or Motel Use shall not be considered a change in 
the underlying occupancy classification of the property. 
 
106A.3.1 Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in 
writing on a form furnished by the code enforcement agency for that purpose. Every such 
application shall: 
   1.   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 

--- Page 55 ---
53 
   2.   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street 
address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed 
building or work. 
   3.   For new buildings or structures, indicate the use or occupancy of all parts of the building or 
structure for which the proposed work is intended. For alteration work, indicate the proposed use 
or occupancy and the most current legal use or occupancy of all portions of the building or 
structure affected by or relevant to the proposed work. 
   4.   Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and specifications and other data as 
required in Section 106A.3.2. 
   5.   State the valuation of any new building or structure or any addition, remodeling or 
alteration to an existing building. 
   6.   Be signed by the owner, or the owner’s authorized agent, who may be required to submit 
evidence to indicate such authority. Such agent shall be responsible for advising the owner of all 
conditions attached to the application by the various approving agencies. 
   7.   Give such other data and information as may be required by the building official. 
   8.   Include, when available, the name, address and telephone number of the owner or 
contractor. When applicable, State and City license numbers shall be indicated. 
   9.   Contain an agreement by the owner of the premises to hold harmless the City and County 
of San Francisco and its officials and employees from all costs, liability and damages resulting, 
whether directly or indirectly, from use or occupancy of the sidewalk, street or subsidewalk 
space, or from anything in connection with the work included in the permit. The agreement shall 
run with the land and be binding on all of the owner’s successors in title. 
   10.   Include an affidavit, signed under penalty of perjury, that the owner, or the owner’s 
authorized representative, is not removing a legal or illegal dwelling unit, as defined in the 
Housing Code, when the work included in the permit is removal of a stove, kitchen, as defined in 
the Housing Code, or bathroom, as defined in the Housing Code. Such affidavit shall be posted 
prominently for at least fifteen (15) days in a conspicuous common area within the building 
where the work is proposed and shall be provided via hand delivery or U.S. mail to all tenants 
residing in the building. 
 25.   Use of a hotel or motel for Interim Housing use, as defined and authorized in Planning 
Code Section 202.15, as may be amended from time to time, where the Department confirms the 
hotel or motel meets the minimum fire and safety requirements set forth in Section PQ111 of 
Appendix PQ to this Code. The use of a hotel or motel or any units within a hotel or motel for 
Interim Housing shall not change the underlying occupancy classification of the property. 
106A.3.1.1 Application processing. The application, plans, specifications and other information 
submitted shall be referred for such review and approval as is required under applicable 
ordinances and laws. Each such reviewing bureau, department or agency shall indicate in a 
manner determined by the Building Official its approval, approval with conditions, or 
disapproval. 
106A.3.1.2 Transfer of application. Applications are transferable with payment of additional 
fees when the new owner submits a letter to the Department agreeing to all conditions of 
approval, stipulations and agreements contained on the application, per Table 1A-D. 
106A.3.1.3 Authorization of dwelling units installed without a permit. 
   (a)   Screening required. Prior to filing a permit application to legalize an existing 
unauthorized dwelling unit under Section 207.3 of the Planning Code, the owner of the building 
or the owner’s authorized agent shall submit the following information to the Department for the 

--- Page 56 ---
54 
purpose of determining whether the unauthorized dwelling unit can comply with the 
requirements of this Code or other codes administered and enforced by the Department, or 
whether equivalencies from Code requirements can be obtained: 
      (1)   a Dwelling Unit Legalization Checklist form, created by the Department, together with 
floor plans for the entire building and a plan showing the location of all structures on the subject 
lot; 
      (2)   evidence from the San Francisco Water Department, telephone, gas or electric records, 
written lease agreements, or other evidence acceptable to the Department showing that the 
dwelling unit for which approval is sought existed prior to January 1, 2013; 
      (3)   an assessment prepared by a licensed contractor, architect, or engineer that outlines a 
plan to comply with all applicable requirements of the Building Code and other Codes 
administered and enforced by the Department; and 
      (4)   other information as the Building Official shall require. 
   (b)   Imminent and substantial hazard. If the Department identifies an imminent and 
substantial hazard as described in Section 102A.16 of this Code during the screening process, the 
Department shall inform the applicant of the appropriate remedial actions and notifications to 
tenants. The Department shall not pursue remedial code enforcement actions and notifications to 
tenants based solely on information provided by the applicant during the screening process, 
unless the Department identifies an imminent and substantial hazard or the applicant consents. 
   (c)   Application process; required permit(s). After completion of the screening process 
required by subsection (a) a property owner or the owner’s authorized agent may file 
applications with the Department, Fire Department, or other City department for any building or 
other permits that are required in order to legalize one existing unauthorized dwelling unit on the 
property. The application(s) shall refer explicitly to this Section 106A .3.1.3 and Section 207.3 of 
the Planning Code. If there is more than one existing unauthorized unit on the site, the owner or 
agent shall designate the unauthorized unit for which legalization is sought. The approval, 
issuance, expiration, or cancellation of an application filed pursuant to this Section 106A .3.1.3 
and any resulting permits shall be in accordance with the provisions of all City codes, except as 
provided below. Cancellation or disapproval of the application or any resulting permit shall 
terminate all rights under this Section created by the application. A dwelling unit is not lawful 
unless and until all necessary approvals have been obtained. 
   (d)   Notices of violation. If the Department has issued a notice of violation for the 
unauthorized unit for which legalization is being sought and all violations would be corrected by 
legalization of the unit, the Director shall: 
      (1)   temporarily suspend the notice of violation and enforcement action upon initiation of the 
process set forth in subsection (a) by the owner or owner’s authorized agent and acceptance of 
the required applications by the City; and 
      (2)   rescind the notice of violation and remove any related liens on the property if 
legalization of the unit is approved within one year of initiation of the process set forth in 
subsection (a). 
   (e)   Funding resources information. The Department shall provide information about the 
Mayor’s Office of Housing and Community Development Code Enforcement Rehabilitation 
Fund and other potential funding sources that may be available for code compliance. 
106A.3.2 Submittal documents. Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams, soil 
investigation reports, special inspection and structural observation programs and other data shall 
constitute the submittal documents for a permit. When such plans are not prepared by an 

--- Page 57 ---
55 
architect, land surveyor, or an engineer, the Building Official may require the applicant 
submitting such plans or other data to demonstrate that state law does not require that the plans 
be prepared by a licensed architect, land surveyor, or engineer. The Building Official may 
require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or 
architect licensed by the state to practice as such even if not required by State law. Materials 
submitted by a licensed architect, land surveyor, or engineer must be signed and sealed on all 
plan sheets. 
   Two complete sets of plans which may include specifications and three copies of the soil 
investigation report (when required) shall be submitted. Additional complete sets of plans and 
specifications may be required for special permit processing services that may be offered by the 
City and County of San Francisco. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
   1.   The requirements for plans or specifications may be waived by the Building Official, 
provided that the nature and extent of the proposed construction can be clearly described in 
writing, and such a description is filed with the application. 
   2.   In addition to all other requirements of Section 106A.3.2, the following requirements shall 
apply to: (a) applications for construction of new buildings or structures, and to alterations that 
involve a substantial increase in the building envelope of an existing building or structure, within 
the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area, created by Building Code Section 106A.4.1.2, and 
within the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area, created by Section 106A.4.1.3 and (b) 
application for construction on property subject to the Slope Protection Act created by Building 
Code Section 106A.4.1.4: 
   The Building Official may not waive the requirements for submittal documents set forth in 
Section 106A.3.2. 
   Submittal documents shall substantiate that the building or structure will comply with 
applicable codes and regulations. 
   Submittal documents shall include (1) plans prepared by a State-licensed architect, land 
surveyor, or engineer and (2) a construction/staging plan establishing that the proposed 
construction will not compromise the health, safety or welfare of neighboring property owners. 
Submittal documents shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Building Official, based on 
consultation with and written communications from appropriate City officials, including the 
Director of the Department of Public Works, that there is sufficient infrastructure (including 
utilities and streets) to support the proposed residential development and that the proposed 
emergency vehicle access routes comply with the standards in use by the Fire Department or 
similar agency in effect at the time the application is submitted. 
106A.3.2.1 Incomplete applications. The Department will not process an application which is 
not completely or properly filled out pursuant to the requirements of this section. When the 
submittal documents do not contain the information required by this the application shall not be 
accepted. 
106A.3.2.2 Demolition. An application for a permit to demolish a building or structure shall not 
be deemed complete until (a) the applicant declares under penalty of perjury that every party 
who has a recorded interest in the property that is the subject of the application has been notified 
of the filing of the application. See Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Public Information – for fee to 
defray the cost of maintaining records of such declarations and other attendant costs and (b) the 
Department receives written notice from the Department of Environment that the Department of 

--- Page 58 ---
56 
the Environment has approved the applicant’s waste diversion plan in accordance with Chapter 
14 of the Environment Code. 
106A.3.2.2.1 Demolition application and notification. Upon receipt of an application which 
would authorize the tearing down or demolition of a building or structure, the Department shall 
mail written notice to the owners of properties at least 300 feet (91.44 m) in every direction from 
the edge of the property on which the proposed demolition work will take place, as shown on the 
last annual tax roll, and shall provide notice to each residential tenant of the property that is the 
subject of the application and of the property immediately adjacent to such property. Said notice 
shall include the street address of the proposed work and the name and address of the property 
owner and, if known, of the contractor. 
106A.3.2.2.2 Notice to interested parties. Any of the following organizations or groups may 
request notification of the receipt by the Department of an application for a demolition permit 
and of the issuance thereof: 
   1.   Architectural or historic preservation or housing conservation groups. 
   2.   Recycling companies. 
   Such request shall be in writing to the Department, on forms furnished by the Department. The 
organization or group shall specify the area(s) of the City and County of San Francisco for which 
notification is requested, and the Building Official shall establish the boundaries of such areas 
for purposes of such notification. Requests shall be made annually, within 30 days after July 1 of 
each year. See Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Public Information – for fees. Fees may be prorated 
by the Department for any requests which are received at other times during the year. 
106A.3.2.3 Substantial alterations – Notification, sign posting and affidavits. In addition to 
any other requirements for notice set forth in this code, the following shall apply: 
   Any person filing an application to (1) substantially alter, as that term is defined by the 
Building Official, an apartment house or residential hotel (as defined in Section 41.4 of the 
Administrative Code) that contains five or more dwelling units, or (2) remove a legal or illegal 
dwelling unit, as defined in the Housing Code, shall post a sign at least 15 inches by 15 inches 
(381 mm × 381 mm) in a conspicuous common area of the apartment house or residential hotel 
for at least 15 days with the following information: notice that the application has been made, the 
nature of the work to be performed, the means of obtaining information from the Department, 
and the procedure for appealing the issuance of building permits. When the permit application 
proposes to remove a legal or illegal dwelling unit, the posted sign shall also contain a list of 
tenant counseling or legal services that can provide assistance to tenants with understanding and 
participating in the City’s processes, and notice of such application shall be delivered via hand 
delivery or U.S. mail to all tenants in the building. Such notice shall also include contact 
information for translation services into Spanish, Chinese, and Russian. In occupied residential 
unreinforced masonry buildings, required signs shall also include specified information provided 
by the Building Official. The applicant shall thereafter submit an affidavit signed under penalty 
of perjury stating that the sign has been posted as required by this section. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Public Information – for fee to defray the cost of maintaining 
records of said affidavits. The Building Official shall not approve the application until this 
affidavit is submitted. If there is reason to believe that the sign was not posted as required, the 
Building Official shall investigate the matter, shall provide the applicant an opportunity to 
respond to any complaint of noncompliance, shall determine whether the requirements of this 
section have been substantially met, and shall cancel an application or revoke the permit if it is 
determined they have not been substantially met. 

--- Page 59 ---
57 
106A.3.2.4 Hazardous Substances. 
106A.3.2.4.1 Soil and/or groundwater sampling and analysis required. Applicants for any 
building or grading permit which involves the disturbance of at least 50 cubic yards (38.23 m3) 
of soil shall comply with the requirements for soil and/or groundwater sampling and analysis of 
Article 22A of the Health Code, unless such property is subject to Health Code 22A.9 when any 
part of the work will occur 
   (a)   bayward of the 1851 high-tide line as indicated on the Map of the City and County of San 
Francisco (adopted June 27, 1986) (see Figure 1A-1) which is maintained for public distribution 
by the Building Official; 
   (b)   in any area of the City designated by the Director of Public Health under Article 22A of 
the Health Code; 
   (c)   on any lot within the City either presently or previously zoned for industrial use as defined 
in Article 22A of the Health Code; 
   (d)   on any lot within the City either presently or previously permitted for industrial use; 
   (e)   on any lot within the City within 150 feet of any of the elevated portions of the following 
highways: U.S. Highway 101, Interstate 80, Interstate 280; 
   (f)   on any lot in the City known or suspected by the Department of Public Health to contain 
hazardous substances in the soil and/or groundwater, using the definition of hazardous substance 
contained in Article 22A of the Health Code, or; 
   (g)   on any lot of the City known or suspected by the Department of Public Health to contain 
or to be within 100 feet of an underground storage tank. 
   Note: Figure 1A-1 is included at the end of this chapter. 
106A.3.2.4.2 Permit approval. 
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (b), no building permit application subject to the 
requirements of this Section shall be considered acceptable for review and approved until the 
Department receives written notification from the Director of Public Health that the applicant has 
complied with all applicable provisions of Article 22A of the Health Code that can be completed 
without a permit, or that the requirements have been waived. 
   (b)   Subsection (a) does not apply to the following extent: 
      (1)   The Building Official may consider an application acceptable for review and issue a site 
permit pursuant to Section 106A.3.4.2 prior to the time an applicant complies with this Section. 
      (2)   The Building Official may consider an application acceptable for review and issue site 
permit addenda and other permit(s) to undertake soil sampling or mitigation measures to comply 
with this section. 
106A.3.2.4.3 No time limits. For the purposes of completing the requirements of this Section, 
the time limitations set forth in Section 106A .3.7 of the San Francisco Building Code do not 
apply. 
106A.3.2.4.4 Permit notification and warning. 
   (a)   The Building Department shall provide information to all permit applicants of Bay Area 
Air Quality Management District and California Air Resources Board regulations, as well as San 
Francisco Health Code Article 22B and Building Code requirements regarding construction dust 
control to mitigate potential adverse public health effects from dust in general, and from 
naturally occurring asbestos that may be released during construction activities. 
   (b)   All building permits and grading permits issued by the Building Department under this 
Section 106A.3.2.4 shall bear the following printed warning: 
   WARNING 

--- Page 60 ---
58 
   Under San Francisco Building Code Section 106A.3.2.4.2, certain building permits may be 
issued only after the permittee analyzes the soil and/or groundwater for the presence of 
hazardous substances and, where applicable, the Department of Public Health has approved the 
permittee’s site mitigation plan. In issuing this permit, neither the City nor any of its officers or 
employees make any representation that the soil and/or groundwater on or about the site is free 
from the presence of hazardous substances. Nor does the City’s implementation of this process 
relieve any person from their duties and responsibilities relating to hazardous substance 
contamination under state and federal law. Neither subsurface soil analysis under Building Code 
Section 106A.3.2.4.2 nor the issuance of this permit is intended to alter, extinguish, or transfer 
these responsibilities. 
106A.3.2.5 Hunters Point Shipyard. 
106A.3.2.5.1 Compliance required. Applicants for any building or grading permit for Hunters 
Point Shipyard, which involves subsurface disturbance of soil or the extraction or management 
of groundwater, except where such permit is for purposes of environmental characterization, and 
except, in the case of property determined by the applicable ROD to be suitable for unrestricted 
residential use, where such permit involves subsurface disturbance of less than 50 cubic yards 
(38.23 m3) of soil, shall comply with the requirements of Article 31 of the Health Code. Hunters 
Point Shipyard is that area of the City and County of San Francisco shown on Article 31 Map-
Figure 1, which is maintained for public distribution by the Building Official. A copy of said 
Figure is on file with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors in File No. 100577. 
106A.3.2.5.2 Permit approval. No building permit application subject to the requirements of 
this section shall be deemed to be complete until the Department receives written notification 
from the Director of Public Health that the applicant has complied with all applicable provisions 
of Article 31 of the Health Code. Approvals or conditions imposed in writing by the Department 
of Public Health shall become conditions of the permit issued by the Department, and violation 
of such approvals or conditions shall be deemed a violation of the permit. 
EXCEPTION: 
   1.   The Building Official may issue a site permit pursuant to Section 106A.3.4.2 prior to the 
time an applicant complies with this section. 
   2.   Site permit addenda and other permit(s) may be issued to excavate soil or undertake soil 
sampling or implement other requirements of Article 31 of the Health Code. 
106A.3.2.5.3 No time limits. For the purposes of completing the requirements of this section, the 
time limitations set forth in Section 106A .3.7 of the San Francisco Building Code do not apply. 
106A.3.2.5.4 Permit notification. All building permits and grading permits issued by the 
Department of Building Inspection shall bear notice of the above requirements and of the 
permittee’s responsibility to comply. 
106A.3.2.6 Construction dust control. 
106A.3.2.6.1 Dust control required. All applicants for a building, demolition, excavation, 
grading, foundation, or other permit required by this Code to construct a new building, to 
demolish a building, to substantially alter or to add to an existing building shall comply with the 
requirements for dust control and, in addition, for projects over a half acre the applicant will be 
required to submit a Dust Control Plan for approval by the San Francisco Health Department as 
set forth in Article 22B of the San Francisco Health Code. 
106A.3.2.6.2 Permit approval. For projects of over one half acre in size, no building or other 
permit application subject to the requirements of this section shall be approved until the 
Department of Building Inspection receives either 

--- Page 61 ---
59 
   (a)   written notification from the Director of Public Health that the applicant either has a site-
specific dust control plan for the project approved by the Director of Public Health or the 
Director of Public Health has waived the requirement or 
   (b)   the applicant qualifies as an interior only tenant improvement project that will not produce 
exterior visible dust and therefore is exempt from complying with Article 22B of the San 
Francisco Health Code. 
   EXCEPTION: The Director may issue a site permit pursuant to Section 106A.3.4.2 prior to the 
time an applicant complies with this section. 
106A.3.2.6.3 General dust control requirements. 
   (a)   All site preparation work, demolition or construction activities within the City and County 
of San Francisco that have the potential to create dust or will expose or disturb more than 10 
cubic yards or 500 square feet of soil shall comply with the requirements of this Section whether 
or not the activity requires a permit from the Department of Building Inspection. 
   (b)   For projects over one half acre in size, the project sponsor shall designate a person or 
persons who will be responsible for monitoring compliance with dust control requirements. The 
designated person or persons shall be on the site or available by telephone or other means during 
all times that site preparation, demolition or construction activities may be in progress, including 
holidays and weekends. The name and telephone number where such person or persons may be 
reached at all times shall be provided to the Director and to the Director of Public Health prior to 
commencement of work on the project. 
   (c)   The project sponsor and the contractor responsible for construction activities at the project 
site shall use the following practices to control construction dust on the site or other practices 
that result in equivalent dust control that are acceptable to the Director. 
      (1)   Water all active construction areas sufficiently to prevent dust from becoming airborne. 
Increased watering frequency may be necessary whenever wind speeds exceed 15 miles per hour. 
Reclaimed water must be used if required by Article 21, Section 1100 et seq. of the San 
Francisco Public Works Code. If not required, reclaimed water should be used whenever 
possible. 
      (2)   Provide as much water as necessary to control dust (without creating run-off) in any area 
of land clearing, earth movement, excavation, drillings, and other dust-generating activity. 
      (3)   During excavation and dirt-moving activities, wet sweep or vacuum the streets, 
sidewalks, paths, and intersections where work is in progress at the end of the workday. 
      (4)   Cover any inactive (no disturbance for more than seven days) stockpiles greater than ten 
cubic yards or 500 square feet of excavated materials, backfill material, import material, gravel, 
sand, road base, and soil with a 10 mil (0.01 inch) polyethylene plastic or equivalent tarp and 
brace it down or use other equivalent soil stabilization techniques. 
      (5)   Use dust enclosures, curtains, and dust collectors as necessary to control dust in the 
excavation area. 
106A.3.2.6.4 Large projects. If the project is over one half acre in size and the project does not 
qualify for an interior only tenant improvement project exemption or the Department of Public 
Health has not issued a waiver for a site-specific dust control plan for the project; construction, 
demolition, excavation, grading, foundation work, or other permitted activities may not 
commence until the owner or the owner’s agent has submitted to the Department a copy of the 
Director of Public Health’s written approval of the dust control plan. All site preparation and 
construction activities on the job site shall comply with the general requirements for dust control 
and the site-specific dust control plan approved by the Director of Public Health. The failure to 

--- Page 62 ---
60 
comply with all provisions of the approved site-specific dust control plan shall be considered a 
violation of this Code. 
106A.3.2.6.5 Waiver of requirements for compliance for small sites; rescission of 
waiver. For sites less than a half acre in size: 
   (a)   The Director may waive these requirements if the applicant demonstrates to the Director’s 
satisfaction that the proposed site preparation, demolition or construction activities are unlikely 
to result in any visible windblown dust. 
   (b)   If at any time, contrary to the applicant’s assertions, the construction activities produce 
visible windblown dust, the Director may issue a written order rescinding the waiver. A copy of 
the rescission order shall be personally served on the owner of the property at the address on file 
with the Department of Building Inspection and posted on the job site. 
   (c)   If the Director orders rescission of the waiver, the owner of the property and the contractor 
or other persons responsible for construction activities at the site shall comply immediately with 
the above dust control requirements. 
106A.3.2.6.6 Permit notification. All building, demolition, excavation, grading, foundation, or 
other permit subject to this section issued by the Department of Building Inspection shall bear 
notice of the above requirements and of the owner’s responsibility to control construction dust on 
the site. 
106A.3.2.6.7 Violations. Upon receipt of complaints, the Director is authorized to administer 
and enforce all provisions of this Section and may enforce the provisions of this Section by any 
lawful means available for such purpose, including taking actions authorized pursuant to 
Section 103A of this Code. 
106A.3.2.6.8 Fees. The Department shall determine and recommend to the Board of Supervisors 
the amount of fee that is required to compensate the Department for the costs of enforcing these 
dust control requirements. 
106A.3.3 Information on plans and specifications. Plans and specifications shall be drawn to 
scale on substantial paper of a size not less than 11-inch by 17-inch (279.4 mm × 431.8 mm) and 
shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and 
show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, 
ordinances, rules and regulations. Specific plans and information required shall include any of 
the following that is appropriate for the work being proposed: 
   1.   The Assessor’s block and lot number on the first sheet or page of each set of plans and 
other submittal documents. 
   2.   A dimensioned plot plan showing sidewalk widths, street widths, lot lines, locations of 
proposed or existing buildings or structures on the property, and full widths, heights and setbacks 
of buildings on adjacent properties where their locations or heights affect the code requirements 
of the subject building or structure. Locations of parking or loading spaces and of aboveground 
hydrants and utility poles shall also be shown. The Building Official may require the owner to 
have the lot surveyed and staked by a registered land surveyor or registered civil engineer so that 
the proper location of the building on the lot may be determined. A copy of this survey shall be 
filed with the application for the permit. 
   3.   All existing and future finished grades for new buildings or structures and additions to 
existing buildings or structures, including official curb and street grades. 
   4.   Complete dimensioned exterior elevations showing types of wall materials, locations and 
sizes of wall openings, roof heights and setbacks from property lines. The existing and future 
exterior grade profiles on each side of the building extending to any adjoining buildings, 

--- Page 63 ---
61 
structures or properties which might be affected by this work shown on the elevations unless a 
topographic map prepared by a licensed surveyor is submitted. 
   5.   Dimensioned architectural floor plan for each floor, basement and roof unless the floor 
plans are identical. The scale shall be not less than 1/8 inch (3.175 mm) to 1 foot (304.8 mm) 
unless otherwise permitted by the Building Official. The floor plan shall show the gross area of 
each use area on each floor, and the total area of each floor. Structural, mechanical and other 
detailed information shall not be superimposed unless the resultant floor plans are clearly legible 
and understandable. 
   6.   For alteration work, all existing partitions and construction that are to be removed or 
altered and all that are to remain unchanged. 
   7.   Identification on the architectural floor plans of the use or occupancy classifications of all 
new and existing areas of the building. 
   8.   Cross-sections as necessary, including information on location and depth of footings of 
adjacent buildings or structures which might be affected by this work. 
   9.   Information regarding all architectural and structural materials to be installed in the 
building. 
   10.   Details of all fire-resistive assemblies and elements, and provisions for maintaining the 
integrity of fire-resistive assemblies or elements where penetrated. 
   11.   Information regarding the installation, location and support of building utilities, including 
plumbing systems, and electrical equipment, wiring and systems. 
   12.   Structural plans and calculations detailing all components of the vertical load carrying 
system, including joists, beams, girders, columns, bearing walls and locations and depths of 
footings. Connection details and cross-sections to show how the loads are transferred and carried 
from the roof to the foundation. Live load clearly designated on the plan for each use area. 
   13.   Structural plans and calculations detailing all elements of the lateral force resisting 
system, including horizontal and vertical diaphragms, connections and details that completely 
identify the lateral force load path from the roof to the foundation. 
   14.   Special inspection and structural observation program required by 
Sections 106A.3.5, 1704 and 1709. 
   15.   Geotechnical report when work involves significant grading, excavation or fill, or uses 
special foundations; or when the site is included in the State of California Seismic Hazard Zones 
Map, Special Soils Map or other area identified by the Building Official. See Appendix J, for 
additional grading permit requirements. 
   16.   Hydraulic design drawings and calculations for sprinkler systems and standpipes. 
   17.   Information on plans demonstrating compliance with energy conservation requirements. 
   18.   Information on plans demonstrating compliance with applicable sound transmission 
requirements. 
   19.   Information on plans demonstrating compliance with applicable disabled access 
requirements. 
   20.   Information on plans demonstrating compliance with water conservation and reclamation 
requirements. 
   21.   Landscaping and irrigation plans, when required by the Planning Department, Department 
of Public Works or other agencies. 
   22.   Photographs when required by the Planning Department or other agencies. 
   23.   For a building that is an unsafe structure as defined in Section 102A, sufficient 
information to show how all unsafe conditions will be corrected. 

--- Page 64 ---
62 
   24.   Information on plans demonstrating compliance with the lactation room requirements of 
Section 1210.5 of the Building Code. 
   25.   All other information necessary for determining compliance with applicable codes and 
regulations. 
106A.3.4 General Permit Procedures. 
106A.3.4.1 Architect or engineer of record. When it is required that documents be prepared by 
an architect or engineer, the building official may require the owner to engage and designate on 
the building permit application an architect or engineer who shall act as the architect or engineer 
of record. If the circumstances require, the owner may designate a substitute architect or engineer 
of record who shall perform all of the duties required of the original architect or engineer of 
record. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the architect or engineer 
of record is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. 
   The architect or engineer of record shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating all 
submittal documents prepared by others, included deferred submittal items, for compatibility 
with the design of the building. 
106A.3.4.2.1 Contents of site permit application. The site permit application shall consist of: 
   1.   Completed form. The completed application form, pursuant to section 106A.3.1. 
   2.   Preliminary plans and drawings. 
      a.   Architectural Plans. Architectural plans that include plot plan, floor plans (existing and 
new), sections, and elevations to describe the general scope of work. Submit two sets if applying 
in paper format. 
      b.   Structural Design Criteria Document. For projects subject to Structural Design Review, 
see Administrative Bulletin 082 as may be amended from time to time. If applying in paper 
format, the site permit application shall include two sets of the Structural Design Criteria 
Documents. 
      c.   Green Building Submittal. For projects subject to green building regulations, the 
application shall include the information required under Administrative Bulletin 093 as may be 
amended from time to time. 
   3.   Information required for site permit review. The following shall be included for site 
permit review: 
      a.   Building Information and Data. Sufficient information to establish that the project meets 
minimum standards for the scope of work, use and occupancy group classifications, construction 
type, number of stories, and basements, height, and sprinkler provisions. 
      b.   Allowable Height, Story, and Area. Tabulation of the actual and allowable height, story, 
and area, with computations to document analysis, including sprinkler and area modification 
provisions where applicable. For new buildings, tabulation of the gross area for all basements 
and stories individually, and a summation of the total building area. For alterations with vertical 
and/or horizontal additions, tabulation of the gross area for the existing building and for the 
additional area (or reduced area). Values for all basements and stories shall be provided 
individually. summation of the total building area. 1 
      c.   Exterior Wall and Opening Protection. A plot plan locating the building, and adjoining 
properties and buildings, and public ways. Location and dimension of property lines, both real 
and assumed in cases of two or more buildings on the same lot regulated as separate buildings. 
      d.   Means of Egress. Occupant loads and analysis of the Means of Egress system, 
inncluding1 diagonal dimensions of spaces requiring two or more exits and the exit separation 
distances, and diagonal dimensions of each story or portion thereof requiring two or more exits 

--- Page 65 ---
63 
and the exit separation distances. From the most remote point in a story or portion thereof to an 
exit, exit access travel distances must be documented. Where applicable, the common path of 
egress travel distance from the most remote point in a space, in a story or portion thereof, must 
be documented. Travel distances shall be measured rectilinearly at right angles except where the 
direction of travel is guided by walls or other permanent architectural features. 
      e.   Slope Protection Act Checklist. Projects located in areas subject to the Slope Protection 
Act, Section 106A.4.1.1, shall submit the information required by Section 106A .4.1.4.4. 
   4.   Fees. The permit issuance fees and plan review fees shall be as set forth in 
Section 110A , Table 1A- A – Building Permit Fees, and Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit 
and Plan Review Fees, and shall be calculated on the basis of the total valuation of the work. 
 
106A.3.4.2.2 Scope of site permit review. The purpose of a site permit is to allow the 
Department to review the preliminary conceptual and schematic designs of proposed 
construction while the Planning Department completes its review and issues any required 
approvals or authorizations under the Planning Code. To expedite the permit review process for 
electronically submitted site permit applications, the Department shall distribute the site permit 
to the Planning Department, Fire Department, and any other department that may need to review 
the site permit such that all interdepartmental review of electronically submitted applications is 
conducted simultaneously. 
   The scope of review of the site permit is limited. The Building Official reviews the site permit 
to assure that there are no major issues with the proposed construction that need resolution 
before proceeding to detailed design of a code-complying structure. There is no detailed plan 
review required at the time of site permit review, nor shall a site permit be withheld in order to 
conduct detailed plan review. Detailed review of plans, along with any associated revisions, 
modifications, or comments, will be conducted during addendum review after the site permit is 
issued. 
106A.3.4.2.3 Addenda to site permits. The site permit must be issued prior to submittal of the 
first addendum. Plans for construction may be divided and submitted in accordance with an 
addenda schedule submitted on the site permit drawings or on the first addendum drawings. See 
Section 110A , Table 1A- B – Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees – for applicable fee. 
   The holder of such permit and addenda shall proceed with approved addenda work at the 
permittee’s own risk, without assurance that approvals for the remaining addenda or for the 
entire building or structure will be granted. 
   Each addendum must be approved and issued before work shown on that addendum may 
commence. The time allowed for review, approval, and issuance of all addenda is governed by 
the maximum time allowed per Section 106A.4.4 and T able B – Maximum Time Allowed to 
Complete All Work Authorized by Building Permit. The extension times may be applied upon 
payment of a fee per Section 110A, Table 1A-J – Miscellaneous Fees. If all required addenda are 
not approved and issued by the maximum time allowed, the site permit, all previously approved 
addenda, and all remaining addenda shall be deemed to be canceled. When a site permit has been 
canceled, an alteration work application shall be required to resume processing. The provisions 
of Section 107A.3.3 shall apply to such alteration work application. 
 
106A.3.5 Inspection and observation program. When special inspection is required 
under Chapter 17, the architect or engineer of record shall prepare an inspection program that 


--- Page 66 ---
64 
shall be submitted to the building official for approval prior to issuance of the building permit. 
The inspection program shall designate the portions of the work that require special inspection 
and the name or names of the individuals or firms who are to perform the special inspections, 
and indicate the duties of the special inspectors. 
   The special inspector shall be employed by the owner, the engineer or architect of record, or an 
agent of the owner, but not the contractor or any other person responsible for the work. 
   When structural observation is required under Chapter 17, the inspection program shall name 
the individuals or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of 
construction at which structural observation is to occur. 
   The inspection program shall include samples of inspection reports and provide time limits for 
submission of reports. 
106A.3.6 Permit facilitator. Any permit applicant may use the services of a Permit Facilitator. 
The Permit Facilitator shall be under the jurisdiction of the Building Official. The duties of the 
Permit Facilitator include distributing permit application submittals to various review disciplines, 
departments or agencies; and providing the project sponsor with a single point of contact 
regarding permit application status, procedures or requirements. The fee for such service shall be 
per Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees – and shall be paid upon filing of 
a permit application. 
106A.3.7 Application expiration. The Building Official may hold in abeyance or reject any 
application, plans, or specifications filed which in the Building Official’s opinion, do not provide 
the necessary information in a clear and concise manner as required in Section 106A.3.3, and 
shall cancel such an application upon the expiration of the time period set forth per Table A. 
   At the time the application has been deemed acceptable for building plan review by the 
Department of Building Inspection, any corrections, additional information, plans or documents 
that are necessary to complete the processing by the Department of Building Inspection shall be 
submitted and approved within the following time limitations: 
 
TABLE A – APPLICATION EXPIRATION 
  
Valuation Time Limitation Extension Limitation 
$1.00 to $1 million 360 calendar days 360 calendar days 
Over $1 million 720 calendar days 720 calendar days 
   The time limitation shall apply until the application has been approved and permit is issued. A 
one-time extension per Table A may be granted by the Building Official at any point during the 
approval process, upon written request by the applicant and payment of fee. Additional 
extensions may be granted by the Building Official prior to extension expiration upon written 
request from the applicant and payment of fee. See Section 110A, Table 1A-J – Miscellaneous 
Fees – for applicable fee. In the event an extension of time extends the life of an application 
beyond the effective date of the adoption of a new code, the Building Official may require that 
all or part of the application be subject to the provisions of the new code and payment of an 
additional plan review fee per Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees. In the event the application 
has not been approved and issued within 60 days before the end of the stated time period in 
Table A, the Department shall notify the applicant that the application will be canceled in 60 
days unless the application is extended. An application which exceeds the stated or extended 
time period after such notice shall be deemed canceled without further action by the Department. 
EXCEPTIONS: 

--- Page 67 ---
65 
   1.   For applications resulting from enforcement actions initiated by the Building Official to 
abate code violations, the above time limits shall be reduced to 30 days and 10 days, 
respectively. The Building Official may grant an extension for hardship or procedural error. 
Upon cancellation, such cases shall be referred to the City Attorney for legal action. 
   2.   The above time limits shall not apply to applications which are subject to the work without 
permit investigation fee per Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement 
Assessments. Such applications shall be canceled only through specific action by the Building 
Official. 
   3.   The above time limits shall be suspended whenever an application is returned to the 
Planning Department for review due to a design change that the Building Code(s) requires. 
106A.3.8 Disapproval of application. Any application that does not meet the requirements of 
this code or any other laws, ordinances or regulations enforced by any interested departments or 
agencies shall be disapproved by the Building Official or upon request by the applicant. If such a 
request is not made by the applicant to disapprove an application, the Building Official shall 
notify the applicant that the application will be cancelled in 60 days. 
106A.3.8.1 Withdrawal of application. Applications filed for permits may be withdrawn by the 
owner, provided that no part of the work proposed on the application has been performed. All 
applicable fees must be paid before an application can be withdrawn. 
106A.4 Permits issuance. 
106A.4.1 Issuance. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by 
an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official. Such plans may/shall be 
reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws 
under their jurisdiction. If the Building Official finds that the work described in an application 
for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the 
requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified in 
Section 107A have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. 
   When the building official issues the permit where plans are required, the building official shall 
stamp each page of the plans and the first page of the specifications APPROVED. Such approved 
plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from 
the building official, and all work regulated by this code shall be done in accordance with the 
approved plans. 
   The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure 
before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted 
or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying 
with all pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of a partial permit shall proceed without 
assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted. 
106A.4.1.1 Transfer of permit. Permits are transferable without payment of fees per Table 1A-
D when the new owner submits a letter to the Department agreeing to all conditions of approval, 
stipulations and agreements contained on the approved application. 
106A.4.1.2 Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area. 
106A.4.1.2.1 Creation. There is hereby created the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area, 
which is generally bounded by Garcia Avenue, Vasquez Avenue, Kensington Way and Ulloa 
Street and traversed by Edgehill Way. The Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area is 
comprised of the following Assessor’s Block Numbers: 2875, 2876, 2923, 2933, 2934, 2935, 
2936A and 2936B. Heightened review of certain permit applications, as provided in this section, 
shall be made in this area. 

--- Page 68 ---
66 
106A.4.1.2.2 Purpose. Because landslides, earth movement, ground shaking and subsidence are 
likely to occur on or near the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area, causing severe damage 
and destruction to public and private improvements, the Board of Supervisors finds that the 
public health, safety and welfare is best protected if the Building Official of Building Inspection 
causes permit applications within the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area for either (1) 
construction of new buildings or structures or (2) alterations that involve a substantial increase in 
the envelope of an existing building or structure, to be peer reviewed for structural integrity and 
effect on hillside stability. The requirements herein for projects in the Edgehill Mountain Slope 
Protection Area are in addition to all other applicable laws and regulations, including any and all 
requirements for environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act; 
compliance with the requirements contained herein does not excuse a project sponsor from 
compliance with any other applicable laws and regulations. 
106A.4.1.2.3 Mandatory review by Structural Advisory Committee and other city 
officials. All permit applications submitted to the Central Permit Bureau for construction of new 
buildings or structures or alterations that involve a substantial increase in the envelope of an 
existing building or structure (as determined by the Building Official) within the Edgehill 
Mountain Slope Protection Area shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Structural Advisory 
Committee, as defined by Building Code Section 105A.6. No permits for such properties located 
within the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area shall be issued unless and until the Building 
Official has consulted with and received a written communication from representatives of the 
Department of Planning, Department of Public Works and Fire Department, each of whom has 
made a visit to the site for which the project is proposed, and the Building Official has received a 
written report from the Structural Advisory Committee concerning the safety and integrity of the 
proposed design and construction. As part of its review, the Structural Advisory Committee shall 
consider the effect that construction activity related to the proposed project will have on the 
safety and stability of the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area. 
106A.4.1.2.4 Mandatory denial by Building Official. In the event that the Structural Advisory 
Committee determines that there is a reasonable likelihood that the proposed design and 
construction would result in unsafe conditions or would increase the likelihood of hillside 
instability, and such unsafe conditions or instability cannot be mitigated to the satisfaction of the 
Structural Advisory Committee, the Building Official shall deny the permit. The Building 
Official’s decision to deny the permit is appealable only to the Board of Appeals. 
106A.4.1.3 Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area. 
106A.4.1.3.1 Creation. There is hereby created the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area, 
which is generally bounded on the east by Crestmont Drive and its undeveloped northern 
extension, on the south along Oak Park to its intersection with Christopher Boulevard, west to 
Warren Drive, north along Warren Drive to the 6th Avenue and Kirkham Street intersection, and 
Kirkham Street in an easterly direction to its end at the undeveloped extension of Crestmont 
Drive. The Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area is comprised of the following Assessor’s 
Block Numbers: 1850, 1851, 2635, 2636, 2638, 2674, 2675, 2676, 2677, and 2686. Heightened 
review of certain permit applications, as provided in this section, shall be made in this area. 
106A.4.1.3.2 Purpose. Because landslides, earth movement, ground shaking and subsidence are 
likely to occur on or near the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area, causing severe damage 
and destruction to public and private improvements, the Board of Supervisors finds that the 
public health, safety and welfare is best protected if the Building Official of Building Inspection 
causes permit applications within the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area for either (1) 

--- Page 69 ---
67 
construction of new buildings or structures or (2) alterations that involve a substantial increase in 
the envelope of an existing building or structure, to be peer reviewed for structural integrity and 
effect on hillside stability. The requirements herein for projects in the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope 
Protection Area are in addition to all other applicable laws and regulations, including any and all 
requirements for environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act; 
compliance with the requirements contained herein does not excuse a project sponsor from 
compliance with any other applicable laws and regulations. 
106A.4.1.3.3 Mandatory review by Structural Advisory Committee and other city 
officials. All permit applications submitted to the Central Permit Bureau for construction of new 
buildings or structures or alterations that involve a substantial increase in the envelope of an 
existing building or structure (as determined by the Building Official) within the Northwest Mt. 
Sutro Slope Protection Area shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Structural Advisory 
Committee, as defined by Building Code Section 105A.6. No permits for such properties located 
within the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area shall be issued unless and until the 
Building Official has consulted with and received a written communication from representatives 
of the Department of Planning, Department of Public Works and Fire Department, each of whom 
has made a visit to the site for which the project is proposed, and the Building Official has 
received a written report from the Structural Advisory Committee concerning the safety and 
integrity of the proposed design and construction. As part of its review, the Structural Advisory 
Committee shall consider the effect that construction activity related to the proposed project will 
have on the safety and stability of the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area. 
106A.4.1.3.4 Mandatory denial by Building Official. In the event that the Structural Advisory 
Committee determines that there is a reasonable likelihood that the proposed design and 
construction would result in unsafe conditions or would increase the likelihood of hillside 
instability, and such unsafe conditions or instability cannot be mitigated to the satisfaction of the 
Structural Advisory Committee, the Building Official shall deny the permit. The Building 
Official’s decision to deny the permit is appealable only to the Board of Appeals. 
106A.4.1.4 The Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act. This Section of the San 
Francisco Building Code shall be known as the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act. 
106A.4.1.4.1 Creation. The Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act shall apply to all 
property within San Francisco that exceeds an average slope of 4 horizontal to 1 vertical grade or 
falls within certain mapped areas of the City, except those properties already subject to the 
Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection Area or the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection Area. For 
purposes of this Section “property” shall mean a legal lot of record. Heightened review of certain 
permit applications, as provided in this section, shall be given to all property subject to this Act. 
106A.4.1.4.2 Purpose. Because landslides, earth movement, ground shaking, drainage issues, 
and subsidence are likely to occur on or near steeply sloped properties and within other defined 
areas causing severe damage and destruction to public and private improvements, the Board of 
Supervisors finds that the public health, safety, and welfare is best protected if the Building 
Official causes permit applications for the construction of new buildings or structures and certain 
other construction work on property subject to the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection 
Act to undergo additional review for structural integrity and effect on hillside or slope stability. 
The requirements for projects subject to the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act are 
in addition to all other applicable laws and regulations, including any and all requirements for 
environmental review under the California Environmental Quality Act; compliance with the 

--- Page 70 ---
68 
requirements contained herein does not excuse a project sponsor from compliance with any other 
applicable laws and regulations. 
106A.4.1.4.3 Scope. 
   (a)   Properties are subject to these requirements where: (1) any portion of the property lies 
within the areas of “Earthquake-Induced Landslide” in the Seismic Hazard Zone Map, released 
by the California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, dated November 
17, 2000, or amendments thereto or (2) the property exceeds an average slope of 4 horizontal to 
1 vertical slope. 
   (b)   Proposed construction work that is subject to these requirements includes the construction 
of new buildings or structures having over 1,000 square feet of new projected roof area and 
horizontal or vertical additions having over 500 square feet of new projected roof area. In 
addition, these requirements shall apply to the following activity or activities: shoring, 
underpinning, excavation, or retaining wall work; grading, including excavation or fill, of over 
50 cubic yards of earth materials; or any other construction activity that, in the opinion of the 
Building Official, may have a substantial impact on the slope stability of any property. 
106A.4.1.4.4 Mandatory submittal and review of reports. 
   (a)   All permit applications submitted to the Central Permit Bureau for construction work on 
properties subject to the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act shall include report(s) 
prepared and signed by both a licensed geologist and a licensed geotechnical engineer 
identifying areas of potential slope instability, defining potential risks of development due to 
geological and geotechnical factors, including information required by this section 106A.4.1.4.4 
and Departmental guidelines and regulations, and making recommendations regarding the 
proposed development. These reports shall undergo review as deemed appropriate by the 
Building Official or by their designated staff. Such review shall involve an internal review by 
Departmental staff. The Building Official, in their discretion, may require third party peer review 
from a licensed geotechnical engineer. After third party peer review, the Building Official, in 
their discretion, may establish a Structural Advisory Committee, as defined by Building Code 
section 105A.6, to review the project. If there is a history of landslides in the vicinity of the 
project, the Building Official shall require third party peer review and establish a Structural 
Advisory Committee to review the project. For purposes of the preceding sentence, “vicinity” 
shall mean any property tangent to the subject project site that also appears on the current version 
of the California Department of Conservation’s Seismic Hazard Zone Map identified in 
section 106A.4.1.4.3. The Building Official’s or the Building Official’s designee’s decision(s) 
concerning the level of review for a particular project or activity shall: (1) be in writing, (2) 
identify Departmental staff involved in the decision, (3) be consistent with the criteria set forth in 
the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act and any Departmental guidance adopted 
under section 106A.4.1.6, and (4) describe the basis for the decision. 
   (b)   All such project reviews required under section 106A.4.1.4.4(a) shall verify that 
appropriate geological and geotechnical issues have been considered and that appropriate slope 
instability mitigation strategies, including drainage plans if required, have been proposed. 
Review also shall consider any other factors relevant to mitigation slope instability, including, 
but not limited to, the ground slope, soil type at the project site, the geologic conditions, the 
history of landslides in the vicinity, the nature of the planned excavation and construction, the 
proximity and type of adjacent construction, and the effect that construction activity related to 
the proposed project will have on the safety and stability of the subject property and properties 
within the vicinity of such property. 

--- Page 71 ---
69 
   (c)   No permits as specified above for properties subject to the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone 
Protection Act that involve review by the Structural Advisory Committee shall be issued unless 
and until the Building Official has consulted with and received a written communication from 
representatives of the Departments of Planning and Public Works, and the Fire Department, each 
of whom has made a visit to the site for which the project is proposed, and the Building Official 
has received a written report from the Structural Advisory Committee concerning the safety and 
integrity of the proposed design and construction. As part of its review, the Structural Advisory 
Committee shall make findings concerning the review criteria and analysis set forth in this 
section 106A.4.1.4.4 and Departmental guidelines and regulations regarding slope and seismic 
hazards. 
106A.4.1.4.5 Mandatory denial by the Building Official. In the event that the Building Official 
establishes a Structural Advisory Committee and such Committee determines that there is a 
reasonable likelihood that the proposed design and construction would result in unsafe conditions 
or would increase the likelihood of hillside or slope instability, and such unsafe conditions or 
instability cannot be mitigated to the satisfaction of the Committee, the Building Official shall 
deny the permit. The Building Official’s decision to deny the permit is appealable only to the 
Board of Appeals. 
106A.4.1.4.6 Regulations to implement the Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection 
Act. The Building Official is hereby authorized to adopt rules, regulations, administrative 
bulletins, or other written guidelines to assist the Department in implementing this 
Section 106A .4.1.4, provided that any such guidance shall be in addition to the criteria set forth 
in section 106A .4.1.4.4 or elsewhere in this Act and shall not conflict with or diminish any of 
the permit review criteria in this Building Code. Such guidance may provide objective criteria to 
exempt certain projects and activities from discretionary third party peer or Structural Advisory 
Committee review where the soil at the project site is dune sand or Colma Formation and the 
project or activity presents circumstances that would not necessitate more extensive review. 
106A.4.2 Retention of approved construction documents. One set of approved construction 
documents shall be provided to the party obtaining the permit. The owner shall be responsible for 
keeping these documents on the building site at all times and making them available for 
inspection and use by the inspector during such construction until final inspection has been 
made; failure to do so shall result in stoppage of work. The approved construction documents 
shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the Building Official; all 
work shall be done in accordance with these documents. 
   One set of approved construction documents for all building permits shall be retained by the 
Department in reproducible form as public records. 
106A.4.3 Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications 
shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions 
of this code or of any other applicable laws and regulations. Permits presuming to give authority 
to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be 
valid. 
   The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the 
Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications 
and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in 
violation of this code or other applicable laws and regulations. 
106A.4.4 Permit expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions 
of this code, unless an extension of time has been specifically approved by the Building Official, 

--- Page 72 ---
70 
shall expire by limitation and become null and void when the time allowed in Table B is reached, 
or when any of the following circumstances is applicable: 
   1.   For Building Official-initiated code compliance permits, the work shall start within 30 days 
from the date of such permit. 
   2.   If the building or work authorized is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has 
started, for a period as follows: 
      2.1.   Thirty days for Building Official-initiated code compliance permits. 
      2.2.   One-hundred-eighty days for all other permits. 
   3.   An extension of time from the stated periods may be permitted for good reason, provided 
such requests for an extension are submitted to the Building Official in writing prior to the end of 
the time period accompanied by payment of a fee. Unless approved by the Building Official, no 
more than one extension of time may be granted. 
      3.1.   For all other permits, see Table B – Maximum Time Allowed to Complete All Work 
Authorized by Building Permit. The maximum time allowed for Building Official-initiated code 
compliance permits shall be 12 months for all permits exceeding $25,000 total valuation. 
   4.   A demolition permit shall expire 180 days after issuance. Only one extension of time of 
180 days shall be granted upon written request to the Building Official, accompanied by payment 
of a fee. If there is a permit for a replacement structure, the demolition permit shall expire 
concurrently with the permit for that replacement structure. 
   5.   The Building Official may administratively authorize the processing of applications 
involving compliance actions initiated by the Department, in a manner other than set forth in this 
code, so as to effect said compliance most expeditiously; provided, however, that due process is 
assured all applicants. In this regard, the Building Official may reduce the time periods set forth 
in this section as they apply to a second application and permit required by the Building Official 
to effect full compliance with this code and other applicable laws and regulations if by doing so 
code compliance would be more expeditiously accomplished. 
   EXCEPTION: In order to avoid repetitive filings and processing of applications to effect code 
compliance, the Building Official is hereby authorized to establish alternate procedures and 
extensions of time from cancellation pursuant to Section 106A .4.1 and from expiration pursuant 
to this section; provided, however, that the Building Official, in establishing alternate procedures 
and extension of time, shall proceed as expeditiously as possible toward abatement of the 
violations. 
   When a permit is issued but delayed due to actions before the Board of Appeals or other City 
agencies, or cases in any court of competent jurisdiction, or is under review by a State or 
regional regulatory body, the time allowable shall be computed from the date of the final action 
of the agency or court of jurisdiction. 
TABLE B – MAXIMUM TIME ALLOWED TO COMPLETE ALL WORK 
AUTHORIZED BY BUILDING PERMIT 
  
Valuation Time Allowed (1) Extension Limitation 
$1.00 to $100,000 360 days 360 days 
$100,001 to $2,499,999 1,080 days 720 days 
$2,500,000 and above 1,440 days 720 days 
NOTES: 

--- Page 73 ---
71 
(1)   For site permits with a valuation of $2,500,000 or more, the time allowed to complete work 
authorized by the building permit may be increased by 50 percent. For site permits with a 
valuation less than $2,500,000, use Table B. 
106A.4.4.1 Commencement of work on permit expired due to work not started. Before work 
can be commenced on an expired permit on which no work was performed, a new application 
shall be filed and a new permit shall be obtained. If not more than one year has elapsed since the 
expiration of the original permit, the applicant is eligible for reduced fee on the new permit. See 
Section 110A – Table 1A-B – Commencement of Work Not Started. All other applicable fees in 
Section 110A – Table 1A-A or any other table in this code, shall be collected in the full amount. 
To qualify for the reduced fees, the original approved plans and specifications in the possession 
of the owner shall be submitted with the new application, together with a notarized certification 
that there are no changes made on those plans and specifications. 
   In the event a refund has been granted upon the request of the applicant prior to the 
commencement of the work, the provisions of this section shall not apply and a new permit shall 
be applied for and all fees will be required to be paid. 
106A.4.4.2 Recommencement of work on permit expired due to work not completed. An 
alteration permit shall be secured for the work not completed. See Section 110A, Table 1A-F – 
Specialty Permit Fees – for applicable fee to defray cost of certifying site conditions. The permit 
fee shall be based upon the valuation of the uncompleted work. When the permit is for 
completing the work as shown on the original approved plans, no additional plan review fee shall 
be required. 
106A.4.5 Suspension or revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a 
permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error or on the 
basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any of 
the provisions of this code. 
   Any permit issued for which less than the correct permit and plan checking fees were paid shall 
be considered an invalid permit and shall be suspended until the complete bill of fees has been 
paid. Failure to pay the correct fees shall be sufficient grounds for denial of a temporary permit 
of occupancy or a permit of occupancy. 
106A.4.6 Notice of permit issuance. Within 24 hours after the issuance of a building permit 
authorizing the types of work described below, notice of such issuance shall be given in the 
manner set forth below. 
   1.   For permits to demolish or erect a building or structure, or to move a structure to a new 
site, the permittee shall obtain from the Department a sign containing the following information: 
permit number; filing date; address and phone number of the agency to contact for information 
regarding permit issuance; the date of permit issuance; address and phone of agency to contact to 
appeal issuance of permit; name, address and phone number of the permittee. 
      For unreinforced masonry buildings, additional information shall be provided, as required by 
the Building Official. 
      See Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Public Information – for applicable fee. 
      The permittee shall cause the sign to be erected on the site of the property to which the 
application applies. 
      Location of sign. The sign shall be clearly visible to passing motorists and passing 
pedestrians. In the case of moved buildings, the sign shall be posted at the site onto which the 
building is to be moved. The minimum dimensions shall be 30 inches by 30 inches (762 mm × 
762 mm), unless the permit relates to a vacant site or a vacant building, in which case the 

--- Page 74 ---
72 
Building Official may require a sign up to 8 feet (2.438 m) wide and 4 feet (1.219 m) high upon 
a determination that the larger sign will provide better public notice. If a larger sign is required, 
the permittee shall provide it, and it shall contain the information set forth above. The sign 
required herein shall be installed as follows: The bottom edge of the sign shall be at least 6 feet 
(1.829 m) above grade; the face of the sign shall be parallel to the main street frontage and shall 
be located 5 feet (1.524 m) or less from the street property line; the sign shall be attached to one 
or more posts substantially embedded into the ground in order to withstand wind or other load 
factors, or may be attached to an existing front building wall. The background color of the sign 
shall be white, and the color of the text shall be black; the letter size of the first line shall be a 
minimum of 8 inches (203.2 mm) high; the size and style of the text shall be such that the 
message is clear and legible from a distance of 10 feet (3.048 m) to a viewer with normal vision. 
      Duration of sign posting. The permittee shall cause the sign to be erected within 24 hours 
after a permit is issued. The sign shall remain posted until either the conclusion of the hearing on 
the permit before the Board of Appeals or the time for filing such appeal has lapsed without an 
appeal being filed. Except for work performed pursuant to a Conditional Use authorization from 
the Planning Commission, work under a demolition permit shall not begin until 15 days after the 
date on which the permit is issued. 
   2.   For a permit which would authorize a structural addition to an existing building, the 
Department shall mail written notice to the owners of properties immediately adjacent to the 
subject building as shown on the current tax roll. See Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Public 
Information – for applicable fee. 
   3.   For a permit which would authorize the demolition or moving of a building or structure, 
written notice shall be mailed to the owners of properties within 300 feet (91.44 m) in every 
direction from the edge of the property on which the proposed demolition work will take place, 
or from which the building will be moved. Owners notified shall be as shown on the last annual 
tax roll. Notice to interested organizations or groups shall be made as provided in 
Section 106A.4 of this code. 
   4.   For changes in occupancy per this code, notice shall be provided as specified in 
Section 6 of the San Francisco Business and Tax Regulations Code. See Section 110A, Table 
1A-L – Public Information – for applicable fee. 
   5.   For a permit that would authorize removal of a legal or illegal dwelling unit, as defined in 
the Housing Code, permittee shall post a sign at least 15 inches by 15 inches (381 mm x 381 
mm) in a conspicuous common area of the building where the work will occur, with the 
following information: permit number; filing date; address and phone number of the agency to 
contact for information regarding permit issuance; the date of permit issuance; address and 
phone number of agency to contact to appeal issuance of permit; name, address and phone 
number of permittee. The sign shall also contain a list of tenant counseling or legal services that 
can provide assistance to tenants with understanding and participating in the City’s processes. 
The sign shall remain posted until either the conclusion of the hearing on the permit before the 
Board of Appeals or the time for filing such appeal has lapsed without an appeal being filed. 
Such notice shall also include contact information for translation services into Spanish, Chinese, 
and Russian. 
      Revocation for noncompliance. The Building Official shall, after providing the permittee an 
opportunity to respond to any complaint of noncompliance, revoke any permit where the 
applicant has not substantially complied with the provisions of this section or 
Section 106A .3.2.3 requiring notice of permit application and issuance. 

--- Page 75 ---
73 
   The requirements contained in this code relating to notice are not intended to give any right to 
any person to challenge in any administrative or judicial proceeding any action for which notice 
is given if such person would not otherwise have the legal right to do so. 
106A.4.7 Additional work, permit required. When an approved permit has been issued, a 
separate permit for alteration work shall be required for any change in work or additional work 
as set forth hereafter. The fees for such additional work shall be as set forth in Section 110A, fee 
tables, based on the difference in the valuation between the changed work and that of the original 
permit. The valuation shall be not less than $1. Situations which require a separate permit 
include the following: 
   1.   Construction differing from the approved construction documents sufficiently to require 
revised plans or additional plans to be submitted to the Department for approval, including 
changes in partition layout that impact other code requirements, changes in framing directions, 
spans, and locations of concentrated loads, and changes in types of materials used. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – for the assessment for this type of 
additional work. 
   2.   Changes proposed to any building or structure which alter the exterior dimensions more 
than 6 inches (152.4 mm) either in vertical or horizontal dimension, alter the visual appearance 
through changes in exterior wall materials or windows, change the number of residential 
dwelling units or decrease the amount of off-street parking provided. 
   3.   Value of additional work or of changes exceeding 10 percent of the valuation of the 
approved permit work or $50,000 whichever is the lesser amount. 
   4.   A change in occupancy or use, as defined in this code. 
   5.   A change in the construction type of any portion of the building. 
   6.   An unusual condition requiring a permit procedure to protect the interest of the public. 
   A separate alteration permit shall not be required where the change or additional work is 
required by the Board of Appeals as a condition of approving an appealed permit; however, 
revised plans and plan review fees, including back check fees, shall be required for any such 
change or additional work. The Board of Appeals may require, as a condition of approval, that 
revised plans be submitted to the Board for review. 
106A.4.8 Replacement of approved construction documents. When the permit holder’s set of 
approved construction documents is not available as required by Section 106A .4.2, a duplicate 
set of documents shall be submitted to the Department along with a notarized certification that 
such documents are identical to the approved construction documents except for notations by 
City agencies. The Department shall then copy such notations from its retained set to the 
duplicate set and shall stamp the duplicate set APPROVED. 
   See Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Public Information – for applicable fee. 
106A.4.9 Preapplication plan review or inspection. When a party wishes to discuss specific 
design issues or submit preliminary designs for review and comment by the Department prior to 
formal application for a permit, a request for preapplication plan review must be submitted in 
writing to the Building Official. See Section 110A , Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit and 
Plan Review Fees – for applicable fees. Payment of the minimum fee must be submitted with the 
letter of request. 
   In cases where on-site discussion with a field inspector is desired, the same request 
requirements apply. See Section 110A, Table 1A-G – Inspections, Surveys and Reports – for 
applicable fee. 

--- Page 76 ---
74 
106A.4.10 Review of mechanical plans. When an application for a permit contains a 
mechanical component (separate from or in addition to energy conservation design) sufficient in 
scope or complexity to require review by a mechanical specialist, a fee for this service shall be 
assessed and is payable before issuance of the permit. See Section 110A , Table 1A-B – Other 
Building Permit and Plan Review Fees – for applicable fee. 
106A.4.11 Review of electrical plans. When an application for a permit contains an electrical 
component (separate from or in addition to energy conservation design) sufficient in scope or 
complexity to require review by an electrical specialist, a fee for this service shall be assessed 
and is payable before issuance of the permit. See Section 110A , Table 1A-B – Other Building 
Permit and Plan Review Fees – for applicable fee. 
106A.4.12 Review of plumbing plans. When an application for a permit contains a plumbing 
component sufficient in scope or complexity to require review by a plumbing plan reviewer, a 
fee for this service shall be assessed and is payable before issuance of the permit. See 
Section 110A , Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees – for applicable fee. 
106A.4.13 Premium plan review. At the request of the applicant and upon payment of an 
additional fee per Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit Application and Plan Review Fees, 
building permit applications shall be reviewed by the Department of Building Inspection within a 
guaranteed plan review time set by the Building Official. This building plan review time will be 
less than normal turnaround times and will be developed on a case-by-case basis depending on 
the scope of work and the quality of completeness of the submittal documents. At or before the 
due date of the guaranteed building plan review time, a thorough set of plan review comments 
and/or corrections will be sent to the applicant for response. Premium Plan Review does not 
guarantee plan review times during the recheck process, nor building permit approval and 
issuance. If the Department fails to complete its plan review within the guaranteed plan review 
time, the additional fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant upon written request by the 
applicant. This service is offered for plan review by the Department of Building Inspection only 
and does not commit any other City agencies or departments to the turnaround times. 
106A.5 Awning, Sign, and Gate Amnesty Program. The Department shall implement 
the amnesty program outlined in this Section 106A.5 to incentivize and expedite the legalization 
of Awnings, Signs, and Gates as defined below, that were physically existing on and installed 
without a building permit, or for which the Department has no record of a building permit on 
file, as of August 20, 2023. All property owners that have existing Awnings, Signs, and/or Gates 
that were installed on or before August 20, 2023 without a building permit on file are eligible for 
the amnesty program, including property owners with active Notices of Violation for installing 
or having an Awning, Sign, or Gate without a building permit. 
 SCOPE OF PROGRAM: The amnesty program in this Section 106A.5 applies to 
Awnings, Signs, and Gate as follows: 
All Awnings, as that term is defined in Section 202 of this Code; 
Signs, as that term is defined in Section 202 of this Code, that are non-illuminated, under 250 
pounds, and 25 square feet or less; and 
Gates, including security grilles, that are located in B, S, and M occupancies, and are designed to 
provide security for commercial uses during non-business hours. Vehicular gates, as defined by 
section 202 of this Code, are not eligible for the amnesty program. 
106A.5.1 Certification of Existing Installation: No New Construction, Repairs, or 
Corrective Work. The amnesty program shall provide a streamlined process to verify that an 
existing Awning, Sign, or Gate complies with applicable provisions of the Building Code as well 

--- Page 77 ---
75 
as Planning Code Section 187.3, and will result in a building permit authorizing the existing 
Awning, Sign, or Gate. The amnesty program shall not authorize new construction or corrective 
work to bring an existing Awning, Sign, or Gate into compliance. Any alterations, modifications, 
or construction required to bring the Awning into compliance with the Building Code will 
require a standard building permit and is not subject to the provisions of this Section 106A.5, 
except that the fees for any such permit required to repair or replace an Awning that the 
Department determined was not in compliance with the Building Code shall be waived pursuant 
to Section 106A.5.2. 
106A.5.2 Waiving of Fees. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Building Code, the 
Department shall continue until July 1, 2025 to waive all fees for applications eligible for the 
amnesty program and for any permits required to repair or replace an Awning that the 
Department determined was not in compliance with the Building Code, including the application 
fee for plan review, permit issuance fee for inspections, and any enforcement fees, including 
inspection fees required under Section 107A.5 for work without a permit. 
106A.5.3 Streamlined Application Process. The Department shall develop a streamlined 
application process to facilitate and expedite review of Awning, Sign, or Gate permits during the 
amnesty program. The application shall require only information essential to determining 
whether an existing Awning, Sign, or Gate complies with the applicable Building and Planning 
Code provisions, including the Planning Code’s amnesty program in Planning Code 
Section 187.3. 
106A.5.4 No Relaxation of Building Standards. The amnesty program governs the certification 
of existing Awnings’, Signs’, or Gates’ compliance with applicable Building Code provisions. 
Any Awning, Sign, or Gate that is not in compliance with the Building Code will require a 
separate building permit to repair, replace, or remove the Awning, Sign, or Gate. 
 
SECTION 107A – FEES 
107A.1 General. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section or shall 
be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the jurisdiction. 
107A.1.2 Exemption from fees. The fees provided for in this chapter shall not apply to permits 
issued to perform work on buildings which are owned and occupied by the Federal or State 
governments. The San Francisco Housing Authority shall be exempt from all permit fees in this 
chapter except State mandated fees and record retention fees. Permits required under this code 
for buildings and sites owned or leased by the City and County of San Francisco shall be subject 
to all fees set forth in this chapter. 
107A.2 Permit Issuance Fees. The minimum permit fee per Section 110A, Table 1A-A – 
Building Permit Fees – shall be paid at the time an application for a building permit is issued. 
The New Construction Permit Fee Schedule applies to new buildings or structures. The 
Alteration Permit Fee Schedule applies to alterations, repairs, additions or other work on an 
existing building or structure, or to the modification of the scope of an approved permit as 
required by Section 106A.4.7. 
   The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this code shall be made 
by the Building Official. The value to be used in computing the permit issuance and plan review 
fees shall be the final valuation upon completion of all construction work for which the permit is 
issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, heating, air 
conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and all other permanently installed equipment 
and construction, even though other permits to perform such work may be required. 

--- Page 78 ---
76 
   The valuation shall be calculated at the time of permit issuance according to a cost schedule 
posted in the office of the Department or by actual construction cost, whichever is greater. The 
valuation shall be recalculated at the time of any addenda and/or revision issuance. Any 
additional fees due resulting from the recalculation of valuation shall be paid prior to addenda 
and/or revision issuance. The cost schedule shall be adjusted annually based on construction cost 
data reported by a variety of sources, including without limitation, local contractors, design 
professionals, cost estimators or nationally published construction cost data books or websites. 
Contractor overhead and profit shall be reflected in the schedule. The Building Inspection 
Commission is authorized to waive the annual cost schedule adjustment if it determines that 
increasing the fees will exceed the cost of providing the services for which the fees are paid. 
107A.3 Plan review fees. 
   (a)   When submittal documents are required by Section 106A.3.2, a plan review fee shall be 
paid at the time of filing an application for a permit for which plans are required pursuant to 
Section 106A.3.2. Said plan review fee shall be based on the valuation determined by 
Section 107A.1. See Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees – for applicable fee. 
   The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit issuance fees 
specified in Section 107A.2 and are in addition to the permit fees. 
   When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review 
or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 106A.3.4.2, an 
additional plan review fee shall be charged as shown in Section 110A, Table 1A-B – Other 
Building Permit and Plan Review Fees. 
   (b)   If a project involves voluntary seismic retrofit upgrades to soft-story, wood-frame 
buildings, as defined by the Building Official, the applicant for said project shall be exempt from 
the proportionate share of plan review fees specified under this Chapter that is related to such 
retrofit work, provided all permit conditions and timelines are met. 
107A.3.1 Reduced plan review fee. A reduced plan review fee shall be collected for reviewing 
submittal documents identical to those filed within one year of the original approved 
construction documents for which the full plan review fee was paid. For this purpose, plans may 
be considered identical when they contain only such minor differences as exterior finishes, or if 
they are identical but opposite hand. See Section 110A, Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit and 
Plan Review Fees – for the second and each subsequent set of identical submittal documents 
within the stated time period. To obtain this reduction, the applicant shall submit a copy of the 
original approved construction documents for which the full plan review fee was paid. 
   When the submittal documents are substantially changed from those that were previously 
approved, an additional full plan review fee shall be charged. See Section 110A, Table 1A-B – 
Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees – for applicable fee. 
107A.3.2 Tenant improvement work. An application for tenant improvement work shall state 
at the time of filing whether the permit is to include the partition and other improvement work 
for the entire building. If this work is not to be included, the valuation shall be reduced 
accordingly. The installation of such work shall then require permits for alteration work, the fees 
for which shall be in accordance with Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees. 
107A.3.3 Improvement work. When the application is for first-time improvement work in a 
new building and the valuation of such work was included in the valuation of the original 
building permit, the valuation for each alteration permit for part or all of such work shall be 
shown as $500, and the permit fee shall be collected accordingly. 

--- Page 79 ---
77 
107A.3.4 Site permit and addenda fees. The permit fee for projects submitted under the site 
permit and addenda process shall be based on Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees 
and additional fees as stated in Table 1A-B – Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees. 
Twenty-five percent of the plan review fee shall be paid at the time of site permit application 
submittal, and shall be credited toward the final plan review fee payment at the time of the first 
construction addendum submittal as determined by the Building Official. One hundred percent of 
the permit issuance fee shall be paid at the time of the first construction addendum issuance as 
determined by the Building Official. 
107A.4 Expiration of plan review. (See Section 106A.3.7.) 
107A.5 Investigation Fees: Work Without a Permit. Whenever any work, for which a permit 
is required under the provisions of this code, has been started without a permit and where no 
specific additional fees are imposed as penalties as provided in this chapter, a special 
investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments – for 
applicable fee. Where only a portion of the work has been commenced without a permit, the 
investigation fee shall be based upon the portion of the work done without a permit. The cost of 
any penalty for any work done, in conjunction with the investigation fee, shall be borne by the 
owner. 
   The owner or owner’s agent may appeal the amount of the investigation fee if they can provide 
just cause, such as unfamiliarity with this code or demonstrable negligence on the part of one of 
their employees. 
   The Building Official may reduce the investigation fee to two times the amount of the permit 
fee as called for in Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees – of this code for work 
that was constructed prior to the current building ownership, provided that substantiating 
documentation is provided. 
   Where the Building Official rules against the applicant, appeals of such investigation fee shall 
be filed with the Board of Appeals in the manner provided in Section 8 et seq. of the Business & 
Tax Regulations Code. Such filing shall be subject to the fees and rules of the Board of Appeals. 
The Board of Appeals, in reviewing the appeal of the investigation fee assessed for doing work 
without a permit, may reduce the amount of said fee, but in no case shall such reduced 
investigation fee be less than two times the amount of the permit fee as called for in 
Section 110A, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees – of this code. 
107A.6 Fee refunds. When no work has been done and the project has been abandoned or the 
permit expired per Section 106A.4.4, by limitation, a portion of the building issuance fee paid 
shall be refunded upon written request of the owner when such request is made within six 
months of permit expiration. See Section 110A, Table 1A-R – Refunds – for applicable refund. 
107A.6.1 Plan review fees. When an application is withdrawn, the plan review fee paid may be 
partially refunded upon written request in the case no site inspection had been made by 
Department personnel, and 
plan review had not started within any division of the Department. See Section 110A, Table 1A-
R – Refunds – for applicable refund. For other cases, the amount of refund, if any, shall be 
determined by the Building Official, based on the amount of permit processing work already 
completed on the application at the time it was withdrawn. Requests for refunds must be made 
within 30 days of withdrawal by the applicant to the Building Official. 

--- Page 80 ---
78 
107A.6.2 Fees in error. If the Building Official determines that an error has been made in the 
assessment of fees, a refund for the portion determined to be in error may be made upon written 
request by the applicant. See Section 110A , Table 1A-R – Refunds – for applicable refund. 
107A.7 Strong Motion Instrumentation Program Fee. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 
2705 of the Public Resources Code of the State of California, a fee shall be assessed for all 
building permits except demolitions. See Section 110A , Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – 
for applicable fee. All such fees collected shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 2706 of said Public Resources Code. 
107A.7.1 Strong Motion Revolving Fund. That portion of the strong motion instrumentation 
fee retained by the Department as provided for in Section 2705 of the Public Resources Code of 
the State of California shall be deposited into a special Strong Motion Revolving Fund 
established by the City Controller. Funds from this revolving fund shall be used, subject to the 
approval of the Building Official and the Building Inspection Commission, to defray personnel 
and equipment costs incurred in carrying out the State mandate. The Strong Motion Revolving 
Fund shall continue from year to year, and shall not be included in the Cash Reserve Fund. 
107A.7.2 California Building Standards Commission administration fee. Pursuant to the 
provisions of California Health and Safety Code Sections 18930.5, 18931.6, 18931.7 and 
18938.39 relating to building materials, cities and counties are required to assess a fee for all 
building permits. See Section 110A , Table 1A-J for applicable fee. All such fees shall be 
handled in accordance with the provisions of Section 18931.7 of said Health and Safety Code. 
107A.7.2A California Building Standards Commission Fund. That portion of the fee assessed 
pursuant to Section 107A.7.2 relating to building materials that is retained by the Department of 
Building Inspection shall be deposited into the California Building Standards Commission Fund 
established by Section 10.100-45 of the Administrative Code. This category 2 fund shall be used, 
subject to the approval of the Building Official and the Building Inspection Commission, for 
administrative costs and code enforcement education, including but not limited to, certification in 
the voluntary construction inspector certification program. The California Building Standards 
Commission Fund shall continue from year to year. 
107A.7.3 Technology surcharge on permits. A technology surcharge is hereby established on 
the cost of permit applications that the Department of Building Inspection processes for all 
departments and bureaus of the City and County of San Francisco. The surcharge proceeds are to 
be used solely for the implementation and maintenance of the City-wide Permit and Project 
Tracking System. The funds shall continue from year to year and shall not be included in the 
Cash Reserve Fund. See Section 110A , Table 1A-J for the applicable surcharge. 
107A.8 Delinquent fees/dishonored checks. Permits will not be issued to any person having 
outstanding or delinquent balances or dishonored checks on file with the Department of Building 
Inspection. 
107A.9 Survey. A building survey may be requested when a building inspector’s assistance is 
desired to establish code compliance of existing or proposed construction. See 
Section 110A , Table 1A-G – Inspections, Surveys and Reports – for applicable fees. 
107A.10 Building numbers and fees. Every person shall obtain an official street number 
assignment at the time the person files a permit application or establishes a new parcel and shall 
place the numbers so assigned on the building in such a position that the number is easily visible 
to approaching emergency vehicles. The numerals shall not be less than 4 inches (101.6 mm) in 
height with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) [Reference California Residential 
Code Section R319.1] and shall be a contrasting color to the background. All numbers must be 

--- Page 81 ---
79 
made of substantial and permanent material and must be so affixed as not to be easily effaced or 
removed. Any additional or changed numbers assigned to a building shall be subject to the 
provisions of this section. See Section 110A, Table 1A-J – Miscellaneous Fees – for applicable 
fee. 
107A.11 Fees for reproduction of reports, records and documents for the public. 
107A.11.1 General. In order to provide for the cost of reproducing inspection reports, records, 
documents and other material in the Department files for the public, including but not limited to 
records on microfilm, a fee shall be required, payable in advance. Fees shall be chargeable to all 
persons, as well as City departments; when such reproduction is in response to subpoenas of 
records, the attorney requesting such records shall pay the fees. All fees collected shall be 
deposited into the Building Inspection Fund. 
107A.11.2 Reproduction fees. The fees shall be determined based upon the number of pages, 
type of record, size of microfilm reproduced and the number of copies required. All costs of 
reproduction shall require the pickup of said reproduced material at the office of the Department 
unless costs of delivery are provided. The Building Official may make any other rules or 
regulations necessary to provide for the reproduction of material consistent with the intent of this 
section. See Section 110A, Table 1A-L – Electrostatic Reproduction – for applicable fees. 
107A.12 Fees for services and regulatory functions of the Department. Fees for all services 
and regulatory functions of the Department as established in various chapters of the San 
Francisco Municipal Code shall be imposed pursuant to Section 110A et seq. 
107A.13 Development impact and in-lieu fees. 
107A.13.1 Definitions. 
   (a)   The following definitions shall govern interpretation of this Section: 
      (1)   “City” shall mean the City and County of San Francisco. 
      (2)   “Department” shall mean the Department of Building Inspection. 
      (3)   “Development fee” shall mean either a development impact fee or an in-lieu fee. It shall 
not include a fee for service or any time and material charges charged for reviewing or 
processing permit applications. 
      (4)   “Development impact fee” shall mean a fee imposed on a development project as a 
condition of approval by the various departments and agencies of the City and levies against 
development projects by the San Francisco Unified School District under Section 17620 of the 
California Education Code and other provisions of State law to mitigate the impacts of increased 
demand for public services, facilities or housing caused by the development project that may or 
may not be an impact fee governed by the California Mitigation Fee Act (California Government 
Code Section 66000 et seq.) 
      (5)   “Development impact requirement” shall mean a requirement to provide physical 
improvements, facilities or below market rate housing units imposed on a development project as 
a condition of approval to mitigate the impacts of increased demand for public services, facilities 
or housing caused by the development project that may or may not be governed by the California 
Mitigation Fee Act (California Government Code Section 66000 et seq.). 
      (6)   “Development project” shall mean a project that is subject to a development impact or 
in-lieu fee or development impact requirement. 
      (7)   “First certificate of occupancy” shall mean either a temporary certificate of occupancy 
or a Certificate of Final Completion and Occupancy as defined in San Francisco Building Code 
Section 109A, whichever is issued first. 

--- Page 82 ---
80 
      (8)   “First construction document” shall mean the first building permit issued for a 
development project or, in the case of a site permit, the first building permit addendum issued or 
other document that authorizes construction of the development project. Construction document 
shall not include permits or addenda for demolition, grading, shoring, pile driving, or site 
preparation work. 
      (9)   “In-lieu fee” is a fee paid by the project sponsor in lieu of complying with a City 
requirement that is not a development impact fee within the meaning of the Mitigation Fee Act. 
      (10)   “Neighborhood Infrastructure Seed Fund” shall mean the fund or funds established 
by the Controller’s Office for the purpose of collecting the 20 percent pre-paid portion of the 
development fees intended to fund pre-development work on any neighborhood infrastructure 
project funded by any of the neighborhood infrastructure impact development fees listed in 
Subsection 107A.13.3.1.1. In addition, third-party grant monies or loans may also be deposited 
into this fund for the purpose of funding pre-development or capital expenses to accelerate the 
construction start times of any neighborhood infrastructure project funded by any of the 
neighborhood infrastructure impact development fees listed in Subsection 107A.13.3.1.1. 
      (11)   “Project sponsor” or “sponsor” shall mean an applicant seeking approval for 
construction of a development project subject to this Section, such applicant’s successor and 
assigns, and/or any entity which controls or is under common control with such applicant. 
      (12)   “Unit” shall mean the Department’s Development Fee Collection Unit. 
107A.13.2 Collection by Department. The Department shall be responsible for collecting all 
development impact and in-lieu fees, including (a) fees levied by the San Francisco Unified 
School District if the District authorizes collection by the Department, and (b) fees levied by the 
San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, if the Commission’s General Manager authorizes 
collection by the Department, deferral of payment of any development fee, and/or resolution of 
any development fee dispute or appeal in accordance with this Section 107A.13. 
107A.13.3 Timing of development fee payments and satisfaction of development impact 
requirements. 
   (a)   All development impact or in-lieu fees owed for a development project shall be paid by 
the project sponsor prior to issuance of the first construction document; provided, however, that 
the project sponsor may elect to defer payment of said fees under Section 107A.13.3.1. 
   (b)   Any development impact requirement shall be completed prior to issuance of the first 
certificate of occupancy for the development project. 
107A.13.3.1 Fee deferral program. A project sponsor may elect to defer payment of any 
development impact or in-lieu fee, excluding any fees that must be deposited into the Citywide 
Affordable Housing Fund (Administrative Code Section 10.100-49), collected by the Department 
to a due date prior to issuance by the Department of the first certificate of occupancy; provided, 
however, that the project sponsor shall pay 15 percent of the total amount of the development 
fees owed, excluding any fees that must be deposited into the Citywide Affordable Housing 
Fund (Administrative Code Section 10.100-49), prior to issuance of the first construction 
document. If a project is subject to one of the neighborhood infrastructure impact development 
fees listed in Subsection 107A.13.3.1.1, the project sponsor shall pay 20 percent of the total 
amount of the development fees owed prior to issuance of the first construction document. These 
pre-paid funds shall be deposited as provided in Subsection 107A.13.3.1.1 below. A project 
sponsor that has not obtained its First Construction Document prior to the Effective Date of the 
ordinance in Board File No. 230764 and has not yet paid a development impact or in-lieu fee 

--- Page 83 ---
81 
may elect to defer payment under the provisions of this Section notwithstanding a condition of 
approval that required the fee to be paid prior to issuance of the First Construction Document. 
   This option to defer payment may be exercised by submitting a deferral request to the 
Department on a form provided by the Department prior to issuance of the first construction 
document. This deferral option shall not be available to a project sponsor who paid the fee prior 
to the Effective Date date of the ordinance in Board File No. 230764; the project sponsor’s 
reapplication for a building or site permit after expiration of the original permit and refund of the 
development fees paid shall not authorize the project sponsor to elect the deferral option. 
107A.13.3.1.1 Deposit of pre-paid portion of deferred development fees. If a development 
project is not subject to one of the neighborhood infrastructure impact fees listed below, the pre-
paid portion of the development fees shall be deposited into the appropriate fee account. If there 
is more than one fee account, the pre-paid portion of the fees shall be apportioned equally. 
   If a development project is subject to one of the neighborhood infrastructure impact 
development fees listed below, the entire 20 percent development fee pre-payment shall be 
deposited in the appropriate neighborhood infrastructure impact fee account. These pre-paid 
funds shall be dedicated solely to replenishing the Neighborhood Infrastructure Seed Fund for 
that specific neighborhood infrastructure impact fee account. In no event shall a neighborhood 
infrastructure impact fee specific to one Area Plan be mixed with neighborhood infrastructure 
impact fees specific to a different Area Plan. lf the 20 percent development fee pre-payment 
exceeds the total amount owed for the neighborhood infrastructure impact fee account, the 
remaining pre-paid portion of the 20 percent development fee pre-payment shall be apportioned 
equally among the remaining applicable development fees. 
   The neighborhood infrastructure development fees subject to the 20 percent pre-payment 
provision of this Subsection 107A.13.3.1.1 are as follows: (1) the Rincon Hill Community 
Infrastructure Impact Fee, as set forth in Planning Code Section 418.3(b)(1); (2) the Visitacion 
Valley Community Facilities and Infrastructure Fee, as set forth in Planning Code 
Section 420.3(b); (3) the Market and Octavia Community Infrastructure Fee, as set forth in 
Planning Code Section 421.3(b); (4) the Balboa Park Community Infrastructure Impact Fee, as 
set forth in Planning Code Section 422.3(b); (5) the Eastern Neighborhoods Infrastructure Impact 
Fee, as set forth in Planning Code Section 423.3(b); (6) the Van Ness and Market Neighborhood 
Infrastructure Impact Fee, as set forth in Planning Code Section 424.3(b)(ii); and (7) the Central 
SoMa Infrastructure Impact Fee, as set forth in Planning Code Section 433. 
107A.13.3.2 Reserved. 
107A.13.4 Development Fee Collection Unit. There shall be a Development Fee Collection 
Unit established within the Department. The Unit’s duties include: (1) receiving and organizing 
information from various City agencies concerning the amount of development fees owed or 
specific development impact requirements imposed under various sections of the San Francisco 
Municipal Code or other legal authority, (2) working with the project sponsor and relevant 
agencies to resolve any disputes or questions concerning the development fees or development 
impact requirements applied to specific development projects, (3) ensuring that the first 
construction document, or first certificate of occupancy if the project sponsor elects to defer 
payment, is not issued prior to payment of all development fees that are due and owing, (4) 
confirming with the Planning Department that any outstanding development impact requirements 
are satisfied prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for projects subject to such 
requirements, (5) generating Project Development Fee Reports, (6) processing any development 
fee refunds, (7) publishing and updating the Citywide Development Fee Register, (8) initiating 

--- Page 84 ---
82 
lien proceedings to collect any unpaid development impact or in-lieu fees, and (9) performing 
such other duties as the Building Official requires. The fee for the Department’s services shall be 
as provided in Section 107A.13.14. 
107A.13.5 Citywide Development Fee Register. The Unit shall publish a Citywide 
Development Fee Register that lists all current San Francisco development impact and in-lieu 
fees. The Unit shall update the Register whenever a development impact or in-lieu fee is newly 
enacted, rescinded or amended. The Unit shall make the Register available to the public upon 
request, including but not limited to posting it on the Department’s website. 
107A.13.6 Required City Agency or Department Notice to Development Fee Collection 
Unit. Prior to issuance of any building or site permit for a project, any department or agency 
responsible for calculating a development fee collected by the Unit or imposing a development 
impact requirement shall send written or electronic notification to the Development Fee 
Collection Unit that (i) identifies the development project, (ii) lists which specific development 
fees and/or development impact requirements are applicable and the legal authorization for their 
application, (iii) specifies the amount of the development fee or fees that the department or 
agency calculates is owed to the City or that the project sponsor has elected to satisfy a 
development impact requirement through the direct provision of public benefits, and (iv) lists the 
name and contact information for the staff person at each agency or department responsible for 
calculating the development fee or monitoring the development impact requirement. 
107A.13.7 Project Development Fee Report. Prior to the issuance of the building or site permit 
for a development project that owes a development fee or fees or is subject to development 
impact requirements, and at any time thereafter, the Development Fee Collection Unit shall 
prepare and provide to the project sponsor, or any member of the public upon request, a Project 
Development Fee Report. The Report shall: (i) identify the development project, (ii) list which 
specific development fees and/or development impact requirements are applicable and the legal 
authorization for their application, (iii) specify the amount of the development fee or fees that the 
department or agency calculates is owed or that the project sponsor has elected to satisfy a 
development impact requirement through the direct provision of physical improvements, (iv) list 
the name and contact information for the staff person at each agency or department responsible 
for calculating the development fee or monitoring the development impact requirement, and (v) 
state whether the development fee or fees are due and payable prior to issuance of the first 
construction document or whether the project sponsor has requested deferral under 
Section 107A.13.3.1, and note the status of payment. A copy of the Project Development Fee 
Report shall always be made available to the project sponsor immediately prior to issuance of the 
site or building permit for a development project subject to any development fee or fees to 
provide adequate notice of the proposed development fee or fees. The Development Fee 
Collection Unit shall not issue a Final Development Fee Report and the respective site or 
building permit for a development project until it has received written confirmation from the 
First Source Hiring Administration (FSHA) that the project sponsor has executed a first source 
hiring agreement(s) with the FSHA consistent with Administrative Code Section 83.11. 
107A.13.8 Failure to give notice of a development fee owed or development impact 
requirement. The failure of the Unit or a fee-assessing department or agency to give any notice 
of a development fee owed or development impact requirement shall not relieve the project 
sponsor of the obligation to pay the development fee when it is due. The procedure set forth in 
this Section is not intended to preclude enforcement of the development fee or development 

--- Page 85 ---
83 
impact requirements pursuant to any other section of this Code, the Planning Code or other parts 
of the Municipal Code or under the laws of the State of California. 
107A.13.9 Development fee dispute resolution; appeal to Board of Appeals. 
107A.13.9.1 Procedure for resolution by Development Fee Collection Unit. If a dispute or 
question arises concerning the accuracy of the final Project Development Fee Report, including 
the mathematical calculation of any development fee listed thereon, the Development Fee 
Collection Unit shall attempt to resolve it in consultation with the department or agency affected 
by the disputed fee and the project sponsor. A person protesting the accuracy of the Report must 
submit the issue or issues in writing to the Unit with a copy to the department or agency whose 
development fee is in dispute. Any public notice of the issuance of the building or site permit 
shall notify the public of the right to request a copy of the Project Development Fee Report and 
of the right of appeal to the Board of Appeals under Section 107A.13.9.2. 
107A.13.9.2 Appeal to Board of Appeals. 
   (a)   If the Development Fee Collection Unit is unable to resolve the dispute or question, the 
project sponsor or a member of the public may appeal the Project Development Fee Report to the 
Board of Appeals within 15 days of the issuance of the building or site permit under Article 8 et 
seq. of the San Francisco Business & Tax Regulations Code. 
   (b)   In cases where a project sponsor is not using the site permit process and is required to pay 
a development fee or fees prior to issuance of the development project’s building permit, and 
chooses not to defer payment under Section 107A.13.3.1, the sponsor may pay a disputed fee 
under protest and file an appeal within 15 days of the issuance of the permit. 
   (c)   In order to appeal to the Board of Appeals under this Section, a project sponsor appellant 
must first have attempted to resolve the dispute or question by following the procedure in 
Section 107A.13.9.1. Evidence of this prior attempt must be submitted to the Board of Appeals 
in order for the Board to accept the appeal. Members of the public may file an appeal under this 
Section without providing such evidence. 
   (d)   Promptly after an appeal has been filed, the Board of Appeals shall notify the department 
or agency whose development fee or development impact requirement is at issue of the fact that 
an appeal has been filed and the date scheduled for hearing. A representative of the Department 
of Building Inspection and of the department or agency whose development fee or development 
impact requirement is in dispute must be present at the appeal hearing. 
   (e)   In hearing any appeal of the Project Development Fee Report, the Board’s jurisdiction is 
strictly limited to determining whether the mathematical calculation of the development fee or 
the scope of a development impact requirement is accurate and resolving any technical disputes 
over the use, occupancy, floor area, unit count and mix, or other objective criteria that 
calculation of the challenged development fee or development impact requirement is based upon. 
   (f)   If a decision by the Board of Appeals requires a refund of all or any portion of the disputed 
development fee, the refund shall be processed promptly by the Development Fee Collection 
Unit under Section 107A.13.11. If a decision requires a new determination regarding the scope 
of a development impact requirement, such new determination shall be made by the relevant City 
agency or department prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. Where the Board 
determines that an additional amount of the fee or fees is due and owing, the additional amount 
shall be paid prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the development project. 
107A.13.10 Violation of this section deemed a violation of the Building Code. In addition to 
the lien proceedings authorized Section 107A .13.15, a violation of this Section 107A .13 shall 
be deemed a violation of the Building Code and subject to the provisions of Section 103A and 

--- Page 86 ---
84 
any investigation or other fees authorized under other sections of this Code to compensate the 
Department for the cost of abating violations. 
107A.13.11 Development fee refunds. Upon notification by the property owner or project 
sponsor and confirmation by the applicable department or agency that a fee refund is due, the 
Unit shall process the refund. The fee for processing the refund shall be as set forth in Table 1A-
D – Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees. 
107A.13.12 Development fee information a public record. Any notice of development fees 
due or development impact requirements imposed sent to the Development Collection Unit by 
any fee-assessing departments and agencies, the Project Development Fee Report issued by the 
Unit, and any development fee refunds or development impact requirement revisions made are a 
matter of public record. 
107A.13.13 Administrative fee. The fee for services provided by the Department under this 
Section 107A .13 shall be the standard hourly rate for administration set forth in Table 1A-D of 
this Code. The administrative fee is payable within 30 days of the Department’s notice that 
payment is due. 
107A.13.14 Administrative procedures. The Building Official is empowered to adopt such 
administrative procedures as he or she deems necessary to implement this Section. Such 
administrative procedures shall be generally consistent with the procedural requirements set forth 
in this Section 107A . 
107A.13.15 Wrongful issuance of first construction document or certificate of occupancy; 
assessment lien; notice. In addition to any other remedy established in this Code or under other 
authority under the laws of the State of California, if DBI inadvertently or mistakenly issues the 
first construction document or first certificate of occupancy, whichever applies, for a 
development project that has not paid a development fee that is due and owing and payment has 
not been received within 30 days following notice that payment is due, or, in the case where a 
sponsor has elected to satisfy a development impact requirement through direct provision of 
physical improvements and where non-compliance with any such requirement is not corrected 
within 30 days following notice, the Department shall initiate proceedings in accordance 
with Article XX of Chapter 10 of the San Francisco Administrative Code to make the entire 
unpaid balance of the fee that is due, including interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per 
month or fraction thereof on the amount of unpaid fee, a lien against all parcels used for the 
development project. The penalty fee provisions of this section shall also apply to projects that 
have elected to provide physical improvements in lieu of paying a development fee, as if they 
had elected to pay the relevant development fee. 
   The Department shall send all notices required by Article XX to the owner or owners of the 
property and to the project sponsor if different from the owner. The Department shall also 
prepare a preliminary report, and notify the owner and sponsor of a hearing by the Board of 
Supervisors to confirm such report at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The report 
shall contain the owner and sponsor’s names, a description of the development project, a 
description of the parcels of real property to be encumbered as set forth in the Assessor’s Map 
Books for the current year, a description of the alleged violation of this Section, and shall fix a 
time, date, and place for hearing. The Department shall mail this report to the sponsor and each 
owner of record of the parcels of real property subject to the lien. 
   Any notice required to be given to an owner or sponsor shall be sufficiently given or served 
upon the owner or sponsor for all purposes in this Section if personally served upon the owner or 
sponsor or if deposited, postage prepaid, in post office letterbox addressed to the owner or 

--- Page 87 ---
85 
sponsor at the official address of the owner or sponsor maintained by the Tax Collector for the 
mailing of tax bills or, if no such address is available, to the sponsor at the address of the 
development project, and to the applicant for the site or building permit at the address on the 
permit application. 
   Except for the release of the lien recording fee authorized by Administrative Code 
Section 10.237, all sums collected by the Tax Collector under this Section shall be held in trust 
by the Treasurer and deposited in the City’s appropriate fee account. 
107A.14 Third-Party Experts and Other Permit Related Actions Fee. Actions requiring 
third-party experts or other actions not specified above, shall be charged a fee based on actual 
costs that the Department incurs in administering and processing the action or procedure and 
shall be charged on a time and materials basis. The Department shall provide the applicant with a 
written estimate of said costs at the time of application, and the applicant shall pay such fees 
prior to the time that the application is deemed complete. To the extent that the estimated fees do 
not cover actual costs, any outstanding amount due shall be a condition of the Department’s final 
decision on the action or procedure. To the extent that the estimated fees exceeded the actual 
costs, the Department shall refund the excess amount to the applicant within a reasonable period 
after the Department’s final decision on the action or procedure. 
107A.15 Building Code fee waivers for accessory dwelling unit projects on lots containing 
single-family homes. Notwithstanding any fee provision of the Building Code to the contrary, 
the following provisions shall apply to accessory dwelling unit projects located on a lot 
containing a single-family home. 
   (a)   Building inspection fees, plan review fees, records retention fees, and site surcharge fees 
shall be waived. For purposes of this subsection (a), building inspection fees do not include 
electrical and plumbing fees. 
   (b)   For purposes of this Section 107A.15, “accessory dwelling unit” shall have the meaning 
set forth in Planning Code Section 102, as amended from time to time. The applicant for the 
accessory dwelling unit is eligible under subsection (a) for fee waivers or proportionate fee 
waivers, if applicable (collectively, “fee waivers”) solely for the establishment or modification of 
the accessory dwelling unit, and not for any other work on the applicant’s property that is subject 
to the Building Code. 
   (c)   Upon the operative date of the ordinance establishing this Section 107A.15 to provide fee 
waivers forcertainfor certain accessory dwelling unit projects, which is on file with the Clerk of 
the Board of Supervisors in File No. 210030, the fee waivers provided for under subsection (a) 
shall apply retroactively as of January 1, 2021. The Department of Building Inspection shall 
refund any applicable fees paid after January 1, 2021 for projects eligible under subsection (a) 
for fee waivers or proportionate fee waivers. The fee waivers also shall apply to accessory 
dwelling unit projects that applied for building permits on or before January 1, 2021 but did not 
receive a final certificate of occupancy by January 1, 2021; provided, however, that the fee 
waivers shall apply only to applicable Building Code fees that have not been paid as of January 
1, 2021. The Department of Building Inspection shall not refund any fees paid for such projects 
prior to January 1, 2021. 
   (d)   Subject to the exception in subsection (e), this Section 107A.15 shall expire by operation 
of law on either (1) July 1, 2023, or (2) the first day of any fiscal year for which the Board of 
Supervisors has not appropriated monies or authorized expenditures necessary to fund the fee 
waivers established by this Section 107A.15, whichever is earlier. Upon its expiration, the City 
Attorney shall cause this Section 107A.15 to be removed from the Building Code. 

--- Page 88 ---
86 
   (e)   Any accessory dwelling unit projects that apply for a building permit during the period 
beginning on January 1, 2021 and ending on the date that this Section 107A.15 expires are 
eligible for all applicable fee waivers, even if such fees are due after this Section 107A.15 
expires as set forth in subsection (d). 
   (f)   To the extent the Department is aware that a project qualifies for a fee waiver under this 
Section 107A.15, the Department shall individually inform the applicant about the fee waiver. 
The Department also shall post notice, on its website and at various locations in its offices where 
the notice will be visible to applicants, of the fee waivers available under this Section 107A.15. 
   (g)   Department of Building Inspection Reports. On March 1, 2022, the Department of 
Building Inspection shall submit a report to the Board of Supervisors and the Building Inspection 
Commission on the operation of the fee waiver program established by this Section 107A.15 for 
the period of calendar year 2021. On March 1, 2023, the Department of Building Inspection shall 
submit a report to the Board of Supervisors and the Building Inspection Commission on the 
operation of the fee waiver program established by this Section 107A.15 for the period of 
calendar year 2022. The reports shall include, but need not be limited to, the number of projects 
taking advantage of one or more fee waivers, the type and location of such projects, the total 
amount of fees waived or projected to be waived during the term of this Section 107A.15, and 
any administrative impacts associated with the Department’s processing of such waivers. The 
report also shall include the following information in regard to an ADU: (a) the length of time 
the applicant has owned the property; (b) whether the applicant is an individual or a business; (c) 
whether the applicant intends to rent the ADU, and if so, whether the applicant has under 
consideration a price range for rent; (d) whether the applicant has submitted building permit 
applications for other residential properties in the City within the last 10 years; (e) whether the 
ADU received a waiver of code requirements and is subject to the San Francisco Residential 
Rent Stabilization and Arbitration Ordinance pursuant to Planning Code Section 207(c)(4)(G), 
and (f) whether the applicant owns, in whole or in part, any other residential property in San 
Francisco either as an individual or as part of a partnership or corporation. The Director of the 
Department of Building Inspection shall decide how best to obtain the information required by 
this subsection (g), which may include self-reporting by applicants. 
 
SECTION 108A – INSPECTIONS 
108A.1 General. All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to 
inspection by the building official, and all such construction or work shall remain accessible and 
exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the building official. In addition, certain types 
of construction shall have continuous inspection by special inspectors as specified in Section 
1701. 
   Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of 
the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to 
give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the 
jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
   It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed 
for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for 
expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
   In the absence of evidence as to the proper location of the lot on which a building is to be 
erected, for which a building permit has been or may be issued, the Building Official may require 
the owner to have the lot surveyed and staked by a registered land surveyor, or registered civil 

--- Page 89 ---
87 
engineer, so that the proper location of the building on the lot may be determined. A copy of this 
survey shall be filed with the application for the permit. 
108A.2 Inspection record card. Any work requiring a permit shall not begin until the permit 
holder or the permit holder’s agent posts an inspection record “Job Card,” on the site. This card 
shall be issued at the time of permit issuance by the Department. The card must be posted in a 
conspicuous, readily accessible location to allow inspectors to make necessary entries; it must 
remain on the job site until a final inspection of all work stated in that permit has been 
completed. After final inspection, the card may be removed and retained as part of the building 
owner’s record. 
108A.3 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a 
permit to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. The building official 
may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such 
inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the building 
official. 
   It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this code to provide 
access to and means for inspections of such work. 
108A.3.1 Off-hour inspections. Those desiring inspections outside normal business hours (7:30 
a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays) may avail themselves of 
this service by prior arrangement and prepayment. See Section 110A, Table 1A-G – Inspections, 
Surveys and Reports – for applicable fee. 
108A.3.2 Permits by other departments. Those applying for permits issued by other City 
departments which require an inspection, certification or report by the Department as a condition 
of issuance of said permits shall apply to the Department for said inspection, certification or 
report and pay a fee at the Department of Building Inspection. See Section 110A, Table 1A-G – 
Inspections, Surveys and Reports – for applicable fee. 
108A.4 Approval required. No work shall be done on any part of the building or structure 
beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of 
the Building Official. Such approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made 
of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the inspections required in 
Section 108A.5. Any portions which do not comply with the provisions of this code and with the 
approved construction documents shall be corrected, and no such portion shall be covered or 
concealed until approved. 
108A.5. Required inspections. 
108A.5.1 General. The structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be 
covered or concealed without first obtaining the approval of the building official. 
   Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistive assemblies shall not be concealed from 
view until inspected and approved. 
108A.5.2 Foundation inspection. Inspection shall be made after excavations for footings is 
complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required 
forms shall be in place prior to inspection. All materials for the foundation shall be on the job 
site; however, where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with approved nationally recognized 
standards, the concrete need not be on the job site. Where the foundation is to be constructed of 
approved treated wood, additional inspections may be required by the building official. 
108A.5.3 Concrete slab or under-floor inspection. Inspection shall be made after all in-slab or 
under-floor reinforcing steel building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other 

--- Page 90 ---
88 
ancillary equipment items are installed, before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, 
including the subfloor. 
108A.5.4 Reinforcing steel. Inspection shall be made when reinforcing steel is in place in walls, 
floor and roof framing and other concrete members, and before any concrete is poured or placed. 
All reinforcing steel shall be visible for inspection. 
108A.5.5 Structural steel. Inspection shall be made when structural steel framework, or any 
structural steel member of a building, is in place and before being covered or concealed in any 
manner. 
108A.5.6 Frame inspection. Inspection shall be made after the roof, roof deck or sheathing, all 
framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all conduits, plumbing pipes, chimneys and 
vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, and heating wires, 
conduits, plumbing pipes and ducts are approved. 
108A.5.7 Lath or gypsum board inspection. Inspection shall be made after all lathing and 
gypsum board, interior and exterior, are in place, but before any plastering is applied or before 
gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
108A.5.8 Fire-rated suspended ceilings. Inspection shall be made after the installation of the 
hangers, lighting fixtures and air diffusers, the protective fixture boxes and main suspended 
ceiling members and before the ceiling is installed. 
108A.5.9 Final inspection. A final inspection shall be made when the construction work has 
been completed, and the structure is ready for occupancy, but before it is occupied. There shall 
be a final inspection and approval on all buildings and structures when completed and ready for 
occupancy or use after plumbing, electrical and special inspection, and any other applicable 
approvals have been obtained. See Section 109A for certificate of occupancy requirements. 
   An exclusive electrical or plumbing final approval shall not be given or posted unless it is 
ascertained by the Building Official that no building permit is required. 
108A.6 Special inspections. For special inspections, see Chapter 17. 
108A.7 Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified above, the building 
official may make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance 
with the provisions of this code and other laws which are enforced by the code enforcement 
agency. 
108A.7.1 Concealed work. Whenever any work for which called inspections are required is 
covered or concealed without inspection, or whenever work is performed and concealed without 
a permit, and in cases where it is necessary to determine if the building or parts thereof are 
considered unsafe due to any of the conditions as set forth in Section 102A, the Building Official 
may require that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing or recovering or 
reconstructing such portions of the building or structure shall not entail expense to the City and 
County of San Francisco or any of its officials or employees, but shall be at the expense of the 
owner. 
108A.8 Reinspection. A reinspection fee shall be assessed for each inspection or reinspection 
made necessary by any of the following conditions: 
   1.   When such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete. 
   2.   When corrections called for are not made. 
   3.   When the inspection record “Job Card” is not properly posted on the work site. 
   4.   When the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector. 
   5.   For failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested. 
   6.   For deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. 

--- Page 91 ---
89 
   The first reinspection for failure to comply with requirements shall not be assessed a 
reinspection fee. All subsequent reinspections on a job for the same or subsequent errors or 
omissions shall be charged a reinspection fee. 
   Subsequent to inspector determination of reinspection fee requirements, no required or 
requested inspections shall be made nor shall the job be given a Certificate of Final Completion 
and Occupancy or final approval until the required fees are paid at the Central Permit Bureau. 
See Section 110A, Table 1A-G – Inspections, Surveys and Reports – for applicable fee. 
 
SECTION 109A – CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; AMENDED 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR EXISTING BUILDING 
109A.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change 
in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made 
until the building official has issued a certificate of final completion and occupancy or an 
amended certificate of final completion and occupancy therefor as provided herein, or otherwise 
has been approved for use by the Department of Building Inspection. 
   Issuance of a certificate of final completion and occupancy or an amended certificate of final 
completion and occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions 
of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to 
violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be 
valid. It shall be the duty of the Police Department, when called upon by the Building Official, to 
enforce this provision. 
109A.2 Change in occupancy or use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be 
made except as specified in San Francisco Existing Building Code Section 407 506 or Chapter 
10 of this code. A certificate of final completion and occupancy shall be required for changes in 
use or occupancy as set forth in San Francisco Existing Building Code Section 407 506 or 
Chapter 10, except for Group R-1 and R-2 Occupancies; Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies shall 
be subject to the requirements of Sections 109A.7 and 109A.8. 
109A.3 Certificate issued. The Building Official shall issue certificates of final completion and 
occupancy for buildings or structures erected or enlarged; for each change in occupancy 
classification in any building, structure or portion thereof; and for buildings or structures 
seismically upgraded in accordance with the provisions of this code. An amended certificate of 
final completion and occupancy shall be issued for an existing building where there is an 
increase in the number of legal dwelling units resulting in a change of occupancy. The amended 
certificate of final completion and occupancy shall indicate the date the first certificate of 
occupancy and any subsequent certificates of occupancy for the building or structure were 
issued. If there is no original certificate of occupancy, the amended certificate of final 
completion and occupancy shall refer to the date of initial construction on file in the records of 
the Department. The provisions of this section shall not be available for use in RH-1 or RH-1(D) 
zoning districts, nor shall it apply to any residential dwelling that is inconsistent with existing 
law. 
   EXCEPTION: For Group R-1 and R-2 Occupancies, see Sections 109A.7 and 109A.8. 
109A.4 Temporary certificate. Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued if the 
Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building, or 
portion thereof, before the same is completed and satisfactory evidence is submitted that the 
work could not have been completed prior to occupancy. The request for such temporary 
certificate shall be in writing, and no occupancy of the building shall be made until such 

--- Page 92 ---
90 
certificate is issued. Such temporary certificate shall be valid for a period not to exceed 12 
months, unless an extension of time is approved by the Building Official. See 
Section 110A , Table 1A-G – Inspections, Surveys and Reports – for applicable fee. 
109A.5 Posting. No requirements. 
109A.6 Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of 
occupancy or an amended certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this code 
whenever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or 
when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any 
ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code. 
109A.7 Certificate or amended certificate of final completion and occupancy, Group R-1 
and R-2 occupancy. Before the Department may issue a certificate of final completion and 
occupancy for a newly-erected building or structure, an amended certificate of final completion 
and occupancy for an existing building pursuant to Section 109A.3, or Apartment House/Hotel 
License, a written report of compliance with applicable codes, standards and regulations and any 
conditions of approval to the building, structure or property shall be obtained from those 
agencies having jurisdiction. An amended certificate of final completion and occupancy issued 
for changes to an existing building shall indicate the date the first certificate of occupancy and 
any subsequent certificates of occupancy for the building or structure were issued. If there is no 
original certificate of occupancy, the amended certificate of final completion and occupancy 
shall refer to the date of initial construction on file in the records of the Department. 
   Where any permit for the building, structure or property was appealed to the Board of Appeals 
and the Board imposed conditions on appeal, the Department may not issue a certificate of final 
completion and occupancy, an amended certificate of final completion and occupancy, or 
apartment house/hotel license until it determines that the conditions have been met. A copy of 
the certificate of final completion and occupancy or amended certificate of final completion and 
occupancy shall be forwarded to the Board of Appeals. 
109A.8 Group R-1 and R-2 occupancy, apartment house/Hotel License. A license shall be 
required for every Group R-1 and R-2 occupancy structure. The license shall be obtained by 
paying the necessary fees as set forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-P – apartment house and hotel 
license fees. 
   The apartment house/hotel license is not transferable, and a new license must be applied for by 
the new owner within 30 days of change of ownership. 
   The apartment house/hotel license shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or 
set aside any of the provisions or requirements of any laws or ordinances of the City and County 
of San Francisco, nor shall such issuance thereafter prevent requiring corrections of errors or of 
violations of any applicable law or ordinance of the City and County of San Francisco. 
 
SECTION 110A – SCHEDULE OF FEE TABLES 
   1A-A   Building Permit Fees 
   1A-B   Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees 
   1A-C   Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection Fees 
   1A-D   Standard Hourly Rates 
   1A-E   Electrical Permit Issuance and Inspection Fee Schedule 
   1A-F   Reserved 
   1A-G   Inspections, Surveys and Reports 
      1.   Standard Inspection Fee 

--- Page 93 ---
91 
      2.   Off-Hours Inspection 
      3.   Pre-Application Survey Inspection 
      4.   Reinspection Fee 
      5.   Report of Residential Records (3R) Survey of Nonresidential Buildings 
      6.   Survey of Nonresidential Buildings Survey of Residential Buildings for any Purpose or 
Condominium Conversion 
      7.   Survey of Residential Buildings for any Purpose or Condominium Conversion 
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy 
      8.   Temporary Certificate of OccupancyDemolition Permit Fee 
      9.   House Moving Permit Fee 
      10.  Grading Permit Fee 
      11.  Re-roofing Permit Fee 
      12.  Construction of impervious surface in the required front and setback area 
      13.  Night Noise Permit 
   1A-H   Reserved 
   1A-I   Reserved 
   1A-J   Miscellaneous Fees 
      1.   Central Permit Bureau Processing Fee 
      2.   Building Numbers 
      3.   Extension of Time: Application Cancellation and Permit Expiration 
      4.   Product Approvals 
      5.   California Building Standards Commission Fee 
      6.   Vacant Building 
   1A-K   Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments 
      1.   Abatement Appeals Board Hearing, Filing Fee 
      2.   Board of Examiners Filing Fees 
      3.   Building Official's Abatement Orders 
      4.   Emergency Order 
      5.   Exceeding the Scope of the Approved Permit 
      6.   Access Appeals Commission Filing Fee 
      7.   Lien Recordation Charges 
      8.   Work without Permit: Investigation Fee; Penalty 
      9.   Building Commission Hearing Fees 
      10.   Additional Hearings Required by Code 
      11.   Violation Monitoring 
      12.   Failure to Register Vacant Storefront 
   1A-L   Public Information 
      1.   Public Notification and Record Keeping Fees 
      2.   Demolition 
      3.   Notices 
      4.   Reproduction and Dissemination of Public Information 
      5.   Replacement of Approved Plans/Specifications 
      6.   Records Retention Fee 
   1A-M   Boiler FeesReserved 
   1A-N   Energy Conservation 
   1A-O   Reserved 

--- Page 94 ---
92 
   1A-P   Residential Code Enforcement and License Fees 
   1A-Q   Hotel Conversion Ordinance Fees 
   1A-R   Refunds 
   1A-S   Unreinforced Masonry Building Retrofit 
  
TABLE 1A-A – BUILDING PERMIT FEES 
   
NEW CONSTRUCTION 1, 3 ALTERATIONS 1, 2, 3 NO PLANS 1, 2, 3 
TOTAL 
VALUATION 
PLAN 
REVIEW FEE 
PERMIT 
ISSUANCE FEE 
PLAN 
REVIEW FEE 
PERMIT 
ISSUANCE FEE 
PERMIT 
ISSUANCE FEE 
$1 to $2,000 $182 for the first 
$500 plus $10 
for each 
additional $100 
or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including 
$2,000 
$161 for the first 
$500 plus $5.13 for 
each additional 
$100 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $2,000 
$182 for the first 
$500 plus $9.47 
for each 
additional $100 
or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including 
$2,000 
$169 for the first 
$500 plus $3.67 for 
each additional $100 
or fraction thereof, to 
and including $2,000 
$195 for the first 
$500 plus $6.47 for 
each additional 
$100 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $2,000 
$2,001 to 
$50,000 
$332 for the first 
$2,000 plus 
$20.46 for each 
additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$50,000 
$238 for the first 
$2,000 plus $6.54 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $50,000 
$324 for the first 
$2,000 plus 
$27.83 for each 
additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$50,000 
$224 for the first 
$2,000 plus $6.83 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $50,000 
$292 for the first 
$2,000 plus $9.40 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $50,000 
$50,001 to 
$200,000 
$1,314 for the 
first $50,000 
plus $13.15 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$200,000 
$552 for the first 
$50,000 plus $5.88 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $200,000 
$1,660 for the 
first $50,000 
plus $16.31 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$200,000 
$552 for the first 
$50,000 plus $5.88 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $200,000 
$743 for the first 
$50,000 plus $4.61 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $200,000 
$200,001 to 
$500,000 
$3,286 for the 
first $200,000 
plus $8.12 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$500,000 
$1,434 for the first 
$200,000 plus 
$4.55 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof, to 
and including 
$500,000 
$4,106 for the 
first $200,000 
plus $13.53 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$500,000 
$1,434 for the first 
$200,000 plus $4.55 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $500,000 
Plans Required for 
Submittal 
$500,001 to 
$1,000,000 
$5,721 for the 
first $500,000 
plus $8.51 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$1,000,000 
$2,798 for the first 
$500,000 plus 
$3.46 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof, to 
and including 
$1,000,000 
$8,165 for the 
first $500,000 
plus $9.67 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$1,000,000 
$2,798 for the first 
$500,000 plus $3.46 
for each additional 
$1,000 or fraction 
thereof, to and 
including $1,000,000 
$2,798 for the first 
$500,000 plus 
$3.46 for each 
additional $1,000 
or fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$1,000,000 

--- Page 95 ---
93 
$1,000,001 to 
$5,000,000  
$9,976 for the 
first $1,000,000 
plus $6.29 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$5,000,000 
$4,527 for the first 
$1,000,000 plus 
$2.87 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof, to 
and including 
$5,000,000 
$12,998 for the 
first $1,000,000 
plus $8.38 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$5,000,000 
$4,527 for the first 
$1,000,000 plus 
$2.87 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof, to 
and including 
$5,000,000 
$4,527 for the first 
$1,000,000 plus 
$2.87 for each 
additional $1,000 
or fraction thereof, 
to and including 
$5,000,000 
$5,000,001 to 
$50,000,000 
$35,117 for the 
first $5,000,000 
plus $2.66 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$16,000 for the first 
$5,000,000 plus 
$1.49 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$46,532 for the 
first $5,000,000 
plus $2.57 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$16,000 for the first 
$5,000,000 plus 
$1.49 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$16,000 for the 
first $5,000,000 
plus $1.49 for each 
additional $1,000 
or fraction thereof 
$50,000,001 to 
$100,000,000 
$154,996 for the 
first 
$50,000,000 
plus $2.17 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$83,121 for the first 
$50,000,000 plus 
$1.71 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$162,132 for the 
first 
$50,000,000 
plus $2.84 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$83,121 for the first 
$50,000,000 plus 
$1.71 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$83,121 for the 
first $50,000,000 
plus $1.71 for each 
additional $1,000 
or fraction thereof 
$100,000,000 
to 
$200,000,000 
$263,263 for the 
first 
$100,000,000 
plus $2.68 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$168,553 for the 
first $100,000,000 
plus $2.69 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$304,022 for the 
first 
$100,000,000 
plus $2.87 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$168,553 for the first 
$100,000,000 plus 
$2.69 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$168,553 for the 
first $100,000,000 
plus $2.69 for each 
additional $1,000 
or fraction thereof 
$200.000,001 
and up 
$531,050 for the 
first 
$200,000,000 
plus $2.68 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$437,894 for the 
first $200,000,000 
plus $2.69 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$590,988 for the 
first 
$200,000,000 
plus $2.87 for 
each additional 
$1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$437,894 for the first 
$200,000,000 plus 
$2.69 for each 
additional $1,000 or 
fraction thereof 
$437,894 for the 
first $200,000,000 
plus $2.69 for each 
additional $1,000 
or fraction thereof 
NOTES: 
   1.   These permit fees do not include other fees that may be required by other Departments: Public Works, Planning, Fire, 
Public Health, etc., nor do they include plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit fees unless so stated in the other fee 
tables.
 
   2.   A surcharge of $5.00 shall be added to those alteration permits sought for buildings classified as R3 (one/two-family 
dwelling) and E3 (licensed day care) that were constructed prior to 1979 to implement the interior lead safe work practices 
provisions of Section 327 et seq. of this code. 
   3.   All permit fees, including inspection fees, related to reviewing the structural integrity of awning replacements for 
permits submitted “over the counter” at the Central Permit Bureau are hereby waived for any Small Business that applies 
for a permit for such activities during the month of May. For purposes of this Section, a Small Business shall be a business 
with a total workforce of 100 or fewer fulltime employees. To the extent this provision for Small Business Month Fee 
Waivers differs from the description in subsection (f) on page 43 of Ordinance No. 149-16, this provision governs.       
 
TABLE 1A-B – OTHER BUILDING PERMIT AND PLAN REVIEW FEES  
1.   Plan Review Fees Not Covered in Table 1A-A: $399 per hour (Minimum One Hour) 
2.   Back Check Fee: - $399 per hour (Minimum One Hour) 

--- Page 96 ---
94 
3.   Pre-application Plan Review Fee: $368 per hour - Minimum Four Hours Per Project 
4.   Reduced Plan Review Fee: 50% of the Plan Review Fee 
5.   Sign Plan Review Fee: See Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees 
6.   Site Permit Fee: 25% of Plan Review Fee based on Table 1A-A . 
Minimum fee $500 
7.   Premium Plan Review Fee– Submitted application: 50% of Plan Review Fee plus $1,000 
8.   Third-Party Experts and Other Permit Related Actions Fee: 
Actual costs that the Department incurs in 
administering and processing the action or procedure 
on a time and materials basis.   
  
NOTES: 
    1.   See Table 1A-D – Standard Hourly Rates. 
    2.    “Back check” is defined as: (1) that time spent reviewing applicant -initiated revisions to 
plans that do not affect the valuation, scope or size of the project; or (2) any additional plan 
review performed on required corrections to plans beyond the standard review process, as 
determined by the Building Official. Plan review required for applicant-initiated revisions 
affecting valuation, scope, or size of project may be assessed a new plan review fee in addition to 
the initial plan review fee as determined by the Building Official. 
 
TABLE 1A-C – PLUMBING/MECHANICAL PERMIT ISSUANCE AND 
INSPECTION FEES 
A.   Permit applicants shall show a complete itemization of the proposed scope of work and 
select the appropriate fee category. 
B.   A separate permit is required for each structure, condominium unit, existing apartment unit, 
high-rise office floor, suite, or tenant space. 
C.    Hourly issuance/inspection rates of $405 per hour for regular inspections and $477 per hour 
(minimum two hours) for off-hour inspections will apply for installations not covered by the fee 
categories below. 
D.   Fees shall be paid in full prior to approval for occupancy, job card signature, gas tags, or 
final signoff, as applicable. 
E.    See Table 1A-R for refund policy. 
  
Permit Issuance Fees by Category: 
   
CATEGORY 1P Single Residential Unit – water service, sewer replacement, 
single plumbing fixture installation, shower pan installation, or 
kitchen or bathroom remodels 
$276 
CATEGORY 1M Single Residential Unit – mechanical gas appliance (furnace, 
hydronic heat, heat pump) 
$267 
CATEGORY 2PA Plumbing installation for residential construction with 6 or less 
dwelling units or guest rooms; without underground plumbing 
installation (includes water, gas, waste, and vent) 
$483 
CATEGORY 2PB Plumbing installation for residential construction with 6 
dwelling units or guest rooms or less; with underground 
plumbing installation (includes water, gas, waste, and vent) 
$701 

--- Page 97 ---
95 
CATEGORY 2M Mechanical gas appliances for residential construction with 6 
dwelling units or guest rooms or less 
$400 
CATEGORY 3PA 7 – 12 Dwelling Units $991 
CATEGORY 3PB 13 – 36 Dwelling Units $1,982 
CATEGORY 3PC Over 36 Dwelling Units $7,989 
CATEGORY 3MA 7 – 12 Dwelling Units $996 
CATEGORY 3MB 13 – 36 Dwelling Units $1,980 
CATEGORY 3MC Over 36 Dwelling Units $8,403 
CATEGORY 4PA Fire sprinklers – one and two family dwelling units $267 
CATEGORY 4PB Fire sprinklers – 3 or more dwelling units or guest rooms, 
commercial and office – per floor 
$348 
CATEGORY 5P/5M Office, mercantile & retail buildings: New or Tenant 
Improvements; heating/cooling equipment to piping connected 
thereto – per tenant or per floor, whichever is less 
$582 
CATEGORY 6PA Restaurants (new and remodel) fee includes 5 or less drainage 
and or gas outlets – no fees required for public or private 
restroom 
$543 
CATEGORY 6PB Restaurants (new and remodel) fee includes 6 or more drainage 
and/or gas outlets – no fees required for public or private 
restroom 
$1,525 
CATEGORY 8 New boiler installations over 200 kbtu $484 
CATEGORY 9P/M Surveys $507 
CATEGORY 10P/M Condominium conversions $617 
CATEGORY 11P/M Miscellaneous $310 
Boiler Maintenance Program 
     Permit to operate or renew (certificate issued) - Online $122 
     Permit to operate or renew (certificate issued) – In-House $208 
     Connection to utility company-provided steam (includes permit to operate) $208 per 
hour 
(Minimum 
One-Half 
Hour) 
     Renewal required:  
          1.  Low-pressure boilers every 12 months. (See definition of low-pressure boilers in Chapter 2.) 
          2.  Water heaters when alteration or replacement permits are issued. 
 
   
  
A permit may include more than one category, and each category will be charged separately. 
  
TABLE 1A-D – STANDARD HOURLY RATES 
  
1.   Plan Review           $481 per hour 
2.   Inspection           $571 per hour, $742 per hour for off-hour inspection 
3.   Administration       $298 per hour 
4.   Housing Inspection  $596 per hour 
 

--- Page 98 ---
96 
TABLE 1A-E – ELECTRICAL PERMIT ISSUANCE AND INSPECTION 
FEE SCHEDULE 
A.   Permit applicants are required to itemize the proposed scope of work and select the 
appropriate category and fee amount. 
B.   Separate permits are required for each structure, condominium unit, existing dwelling unit 
(except in R3 occupancies), common area, commercial office floor or individual tenant 
space. 
C.    Hourly permit issuance/inspection rates of $405 per hour for regular inspections and $477 
per hour (minimum two hours) for off-hour inspections shall apply for installations not 
covered by this fee schedule. 
D.   Fees shall be paid in full prior to obtaining: occupancy approval, job card signature, 
permission to energize, or final signoff, as applicable. 
E.   For the purpose of fee calculation: appliances and utilization equipment each count as one 
outlet or device in addition to receptacles, switches, and light outlets. 
F.   All permit fees, including inspection fees, related to reviewing the installation of pedestrian 
level lighting are hereby waived for any Small Business that applies for a permit for such 
activities during the month of May. For purposes of this Section, a Small Business shall be a 
business with a total workforce of 100 or fewer fulltime employees. To the extent this 
provision for Small Business Month Fee Waivers differs from the description in subsection 
(f) on page 43 of Ordinance No. 149-16, this provision governs. 
   See Table 1A-R for refund policy. 
   See Table 1A-J for permit extensions. 
  
   Category 1 
   General Wiring: Residential Buildings up to 10,000 sq. ft. 
   
Up to 10 outlets and/or devices $273 
11 to 20 outlets and/or devices $426 
Up to 40 outlets and/or devices, includes up to 200 Amp service upgrade $534 
* More than 40 outlets and/or devices $734 
* Buildings of 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft. $1066 
  
   Category 2 
   General Wiring: Nonresidential Buildings & Residential Buildings over 10,000 sq. ft. 
   
Up to 5 outlets and/or devices $410 
6 to 20 outlets and/or devices $630 
* Areas up to 2,500 sq. ft. $855 
* 2,501 to 5,000 sq. ft. $1,251 
* 5,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. $2,119 
* 10,001 to 30,000 sq. ft. $4,177 
* 30,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. $8,528 

--- Page 99 ---
97 
* 50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. $12,669 
* 100,001 to 500,000 sq. ft. $25,683 
* 500,001 to 1,000,000 sq. ft. $57,026 
* More than 1,000,000 sq. ft. $113,993 
* Includes Category 3 & 4 installations in new buildings or major remodel work  
  
  
   Category 3 
   Service Distribution and Utilization Equipment 
   Includes: Generators, UPS, Transformers and Fire Pumps 
   (Use Category 3 for installations separate from the scope of work in Categories 1 or 2) 
   
225 amps rating or less $397 
250 to 500 amps $609 
600 to 1000 amps $822 
1,200 to 2,000 amps $1,248 
More than 2,000 amps $1,619 
600 volts or more $1,672 
150 kva or less $398 
151 kva or more $609 
Fire Pump installations $824   
  
   Category 4 
   Installations of Fire Warning and Controlled Devices 
   (Use Category 4 for installations separate from the scope of work in Categories 1 or 2) 
   
Up to 2,500 sq. ft. $461 
2,501 to 5,000 sq. ft. $680 
5,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. $1,251 
10,001 to 30,000 sq. ft. $2,067 
30,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. $4,212 
50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. $8,319 
100,001 to 500,000 sq. ft. $12,211 
500,001 to 1,000,000 sq. ft. $27,749 
More than 1,000,000 sq. ft. $55,697   
  
   Fire Warning and Controlled Devices (Retrofit Systems)  
Buildings of not more than 6 dwelling units $624 
Buildings of not more than 12 dwelling units $842 

--- Page 100 ---
98 
Buildings with more than 12 dwelling units and non-residential occupancy 
 
   Building up to 3 floors $1,226 
   4–9 floors $2,497 
   10–20 floors $4,203 
   21–30 floors $8,319 
   More than 30 floors $12,211   
  
   Category 5 
   Miscellaneous Installations  
Installation of EV Charging Station Same fee as is applicable for 
Category 3 – 
Service Distribution and 
Utilization 
Equipment. 
Remodel/Upgrade of Existing Hotel Guest/SRO Rooms 
 
   Up to 6 rooms $525 
   Each additional group of 3 rooms $264 
Data, Communications, and Wireless System 
 
   10 cables or less Exempt 
   11 to 500 cables $283 
   Each additional group of 100 cables $68 
Security Systems, 10 components or less    $283 
Each additional group of 10 components    $43 
   Includes installations and devices that interface with life safety 
systems; excludes installations in R3 Occupancies 
 
Office Workstations, 5 or less    $283 
Each additional group of 10 workstations    $97 
Temporary Exhibition Wiring, 1 to 100 booths (1 inspection)    $411 
Each additional group of 10 booths    $68 
Exterior Electrical Sign    $283 
Interior Electrical Sign    $283 
Each Additional Sign, at the same address    $86 
Garage Door Operator (Requiring receptacle installation)    $284 
Quarterly Permits    $650 
   Maximum five outlets in any one location 
 
Survey, per hour or fraction thereof    $284 
Survey, Research, and Report preparation, per hour or fraction thereof    $536 

--- Page 101 ---
99 
Witness Testing: life safety, fire warning, emergency, and energy 
management systems 
 
   Hourly Rate    $430 
   Off-hour inspections hourly rate: (two hour minimum) $477 
Energy Management, HVAC Controls, and Low-Voltage Wiring 
Systems 
 
   1–10 floors (3 inspections)    $860 
   Each additional floor    $97 
Solar Photovoltaic Systems 
 
   10 KW rating or less    $283 
   Each additional 10 KW rating    $238   
  
TABLE 1A-F – RESERVED 
  
 
TABLE 1A-G – INSPECTIONS, SURVEYS AND REPORTS 
   
1.    Standard Hourly Rate $405 per hour 
2.    Off-hours inspection $477 per hour - Minimum Two Hours plus permit fee 
3.    Survey inspection $405 per hour - Minimum Two Hours 
4.    Re-inspection fee $405 per hour 
5.   Survey of nonresidential buildings: $405 per hour - Minimum Two Hours 
6.    Survey of residential buildings for any 
purpose or Condo Conversions: 
  
   Single unit $3,700 
   Two to four units $4,738 
   Five + units $5,159 plus Standard Hourly Inspection Rate 
   Hotels:   
      Includes 10 guestrooms $3,541 
      11 + guestrooms $4,068 plus $114 per guestroom over 10 
7.    Temporary Certificate of Occupancy $670 
8.      Demolition Permit Fee $646 
9.     House Moving Permit Fee $405 per hour (Three Hour Minimum) 
10.    Grading Permit Fee See Table 1A-A for New Construction fees 
11.    Re-roofing Permit Fee  
     Single-Family Homes and Duplexes $309 
     For all others $509 

--- Page 102 ---
100 
12.    Construction of impervious surface in the 
required front and setback area 
$229 
13.    Night Noise Permit $670   
TABLE 1A-H – RESERVED 
  
TABLE 1A-I – RESERVED 
  
TABLE 1A-J – MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
   
1.    General Administrative Fees Not Covered in Section 
110A 
$226 per hour - Minimum One-Half Hour 
2.    Building numbers (each entrance) $317 New addresses  
$506 Change of existing addresses or lot 
numbers 
3.    Extension of time for application cancellation and 
permit expiration: 
 
   Each application extension (in plan review) $526 each plus 20% of Plan Review Fees 
   Each permit extension $452 each plus 10% of Building Permit 
Inspection Fees 
4.    California Building Standards Commission Fee Pursuant to the provisions of California 
Health and Safety Code Sections 18930.5, 
18931.6, 18931.7 and 18938.39, $4 per 
$100,000 in valuation, as determined by the 
Building Official, with appropriate fractions 
thereof, but not less than $1. 
5.     Strong Motion Instrumentation Program Fee  
     Group R Occupancies of 3 stories or less, except hotels 
and motels 
0.00013 times the valuation 
     Hotels and motels, all buildings greater than 3 stories, 
all occupancies other than Group R 
0.00024 times the valuation 
     Minimum fee $1.60 
6.    Subdivision $692 
7.    Slope and Seismic Hazard Zone Protection Act $2,888 
8.   Local Equivalency Fee $481 per hour (Minimum Quarter Hour)   
  
TABLE 1A-K – PENALTIES, HEARINGS, CODE ENFORCEMENT 
ASSESSMENTS 
   
1.    Abatement Appeals Board hearing, filing fee $534 per case 
2.    Board of Examiners filing fees:   

--- Page 103 ---
101 
   Each appeal for variance from interpretation of code 
requirements 
$372 per hour Minimum Four Hours 
   Each appeal for approval of substitute materials or 
methods of construction 
$372 per hour Minimum Four Hours 
3.    Building Official’s abatement order hearing $372 per hour - Minimum Two Hours 
4.    Emergency order $497 per hour Minimum Two Hours 
5.    Exceeding the scope of the approved permit 2 times the Permit Issuance Fee 
6.    Access Appeals Commission:   
   Filing fee $471 per hour - Minimum Two Hours per 
appeal 
   Request for a rehearing $471 per hour - Minimum Two Hours 
7.    Lien recordation charges $372 or 10% of the amount of the unpaid 
balance, including interest, whichever is 
greater 
8.    Work without permit: investigation fee:   
   Building, Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical Code 
violations 
9 times the Permit Issuance Fee plus the 
original permit fee 
9.    Building Inspection Commission hearing fees:   
   Notice of appeal $471 per hour - Minimum Four Hours 
   Request for jurisdiction $471 per hour - Minimum Four Hours 
   Request for rehearing $471 per hour - Minimum Two Hours 
10.    Additional hearings required by Code $471 per hour - Minimum Four Hours 
11.    Violation monitoring fee (in-house) $149 each per month 
12.   Failure to register vacant commercial storefront 4 times the registration fee 
13.    Subordination $894 
14.    Vacant building – initial and annual registration fee $1,850   
 
TABLE 1A-L – PUBLIC INFORMATION  
1.    Public notification and record keeping fees:   
   Structural addition notice $257 per hour - Minimum Three-
Quarter Hour 
   Posting of notices (change of use) $257 per hour - Minimum Three-
Quarter Hour 
   Requesting notice of permit issuance (each address) per year $57 per hour - Minimum Three-
Quarter Hour 
   30-inch by 30-inch (762 mm by 762 mm) sign $64 
2.    Demolition:   
   Notice of application and permit issuance by area/interested parties:   

--- Page 104 ---
102 
      1 area (1 area = 2 blocks) $205 yearly fee for each area 
3.    Notices:   
   300-foot (91.44 m) notification letters $184 per hour - Minimum Three 
Hours 
   Residential tenants notification $184 per hour - Minimum One-
Half Hour 
4.    Reproduction and dissemination of public information:   
   Certification of copies:   
      1 to 10 pages $33 
   Hard copy prints:   
5.   Records Retention Fee   
Each 20 pages or fraction thereof of plans or supporting 
documentation (e.g. soil reports, structural calculations, acoustical 
reports, energy calculations, etc.) 
$74 
6.   Report of residential records (3R) $286 
7.   Duplication of Plans Administration Fee $113   
  
TABLE 1A-M – RESERVED 
  
 
TABLE 1A-N – ENERGY CONSERVATION 
  INITIAL INSPECTION COMPLIANCE INSPECTION 
Single-family dwellings and two-
family dwellings 
$448 $200 
Apartment houses and residential 
hotels: 
  
   Up to 20 rooms $603 $299 
   Each additional 10 rooms or 
portion thereof 
$200 $155 
Energy reports and certificates: 
 
$113 
Filing fee for appeals: 
 
$226 
Certification of qualified energy 
inspector: 
 
$450 
   
  
TABLE 1A-O – RESERVED 
  
TABLE 1A-P – RESIDENTIAL CODE ENFORCEMENT AND LICENSE 
FEES  
1.    One- and Two-family dwelling unit fees: $140 per rental unit 

--- Page 105 ---
103 
2.    Apartment house license fees:   
   Apartment houses of 3 to 12 units $542 per annum 
   Apartment houses of 13 to 30 units $863 per annum 
   Apartment houses of more than 30 units $1,066 and $156 for each additional 10 units or portion 
thereof 
3.    Hotel license fees:   
   Hotels of 6 to 29 rooms $639 per annum 
   Hotels of 30 to 59 rooms $956 per annum 
   Hotels of 60 to 149 rooms $1,154 per annum 
   Hotels of 150 to 200 rooms $1,454 per annum 
   Hotels of more than 200 rooms $1,849 and $156 for each additional 25 rooms or portion 
thereof   
  
TABLE 1A-Q – HOTEL CONVERSION ORDINANCE FEES  
1.   Annual unit usage report $228 
2.   Appeal of initial or annual status determination: $405 per hour pursuant to Section 
110A of this Code shall apply for 
Department Inspector’s work on such 
request plus fees for Hearing Officer 
3.   Challenge to claims of exemption:   
   Usage report $113 
   Claim of exemption based on low-income housing $7996 
   Claim of exemption based on partially completed conversion $1,119 
4.   Complaint of unlawful conversion $113 
   Determination by Department of Real Estate and cost of 
independent appraisals 
Actual costs 
5.   Initial unit usage report $799 
6.   Permit to convert $1,317 
7.   Request for hearing to exceed 25% tourist season rental limit:   
   Inspection staff review $405 per hour 
   Statement of exemption - Hearing Officer fee $797 
8.   Unsuccessful challenge:   
   Usage report:   
      Inspection staff review $405 per hour 
      Statement of exemption - Hearing Officer fee $799 
   Request for winter rental:   
      Standard hourly inspection fee $405 per hour   

--- Page 106 ---
104 
  
TABLE 1A-R – REFUNDS 
Partial or complete refunds of only those fees contained herein will be given, provided the 
applicant meets the refund requirements of the applicable section of this Code. No other fees are 
refundable, except as follows: 
  
1.    Application or Permit Issuance Fee:   
   Building, plumbing, electrical or mechanical 
permit issuance fee 
Amount paid less $357 or actual costs, whichever is 
greater. No refunds given after work started. 
   Plan Review Fees (each) Amount determined by the Building Official less $357 
No Refund due after application deemed acceptable for 
Department of Building Inspection Plan Review 
2.    Miscellaneous Fees: Amount paid less $357 
No refunds less than $357 
No refunds given after work started 
  
No existing permittee who paid a fee under the fee schedules in effect at the time the fee was 
paid shall be eligible for a refund or subject to a fee reassessment as a result of an amendment to 
the fee schedules. If the Building Official determines that an error has been made in the 
assessment of fees, a refund for the portion determined to be in error may be made upon written 
request by the applicant. 
 
TABLE 1A-S – UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL 
BUILDING RETROFIT 
  
Review of Inventory Form (Section 1604B.2.1) $372 per hour - Minimum Two 
Hours 
Review of the summary of the engineering report (Section 
1604B.2.3) 
$372 per hour - Minimum Two 
Hours 
Board of Examiners filing fees (Section 105A7.4):   
   Each appeal for a variance from or interpretation of code 
requirements 
$372 per hour - Minimum Two 
Hours 
   Each appeal for the approval of substitute materials or methods 
of design or construction (Section 105A.7.3) 
$372 per hour - Minimum Four 
Hours 
  
FIGURE 1A-I – 1851 HIGH-TIDE LINE MAP 

--- Page 107 ---
105 
 
  


--- Page 108 ---
106 
 
  
SECTION 111A - ADAPTIVE REUSE 
111A.1 Purpose and intent. The purpose of this Section 111A (consisting of Sections 111A.1, 
111A.2, and 111A.3) is to amend, expand, establish, and clarify alternative building standards 
for the conversion of existing non-residential buildings to accommodate new residential uses and 
still provide reasonable safety to the building occupants, as a means to promote the safe, flexible 
use of the existing structures, as part of the City’s strategy for economic recovery. 
   Key to the furtherance of this purpose is the ability of the Building Official and Fire Code 
Official to effectively use their authority to grant code modifications or authorizations for 
alternative materials, design and methods of construction, and equipment to address practical 
difficulties involved in complying with the strict provisions of the code or consider alternative 
design or methods not specifically prescribed in the code. 
   For example, the Building Official and Fire Code Official are authorized to consider alternative 
building standards consistent with Sections 17951 and 19957 of the California Health and Safety 
Code. 
111A.2 Scope. This Section 111A may apply to projects that meet the definition and applicable 
requirements for Commercial to Residential Adaptive Reuse projects pursuant to Planning Code 
Section 210.5. 
   Nothing in this Section 111A shall preclude the use of the California Historical Building Code 
for the conversion of a building that the Planning Department has determined to be a qualified 


--- Page 109 ---
107 
historic building or that may otherwise be eligible to use the California Historical Building Code. 
If a project elects to use the standards established in the California Historical Building Code, that 
project shall not be permitted to use the alternative building standards of this Section 111A. 
111A.3 Compliance requirements. Generally, the San Francisco Building Code, which adopts 
and amends the most recent edition of the California Building Standards Code, applies to new 
construction or a change of use or occupancy. For the conversion of existing non-residential 
buildings to accommodate new residential uses, however, alternative building standards 
described in an alternative building standards manual (described below) may apply. 
   The Building Official and Fire Code Official shall prepare, maintain, and update, as necessary 
and appropriate, an alternative building standards manual, which shall provide the building 
standards applicable to Commercial to Residential Adaptive Reuse projects as defined in 
Planning Code Section 210.5. This alternative building standards manual shall include technical 
information and implementation parameters, standards for determining technical infeasibility, 
and alternative standards if technical infeasibility is present, as well as other rules, requirements 
and procedures as the City deems necessary, for implementing the intent of this Section 111A. 
   The Building Official and Fire Code Official shall develop, as deemed necessary and 
appropriate, in cooperation with other City departments and stakeholders, information sheets, 
administrative bulletins, training manuals, and educational materials to assist in the 
implementation of this alternative building standards manual and this Section 111A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 202 – DEFINITIONS 
202 Add thisthese definitions as follows: 
ALL-ELECTRIC BUILDING OR PROJECT. A building or project that uses a permanent 
supply of electricity as the source of energy for all space conditioning (including heating and 
cooling), water heating (including pools and spas), cooking appliances, and clothes drying 
appliances. An All-Electric Building or Project may not install natural gas or propane piping 
systems, fixtures or infrastructure for those purposes in or in connection with the building, 
structure, or within property lines of the premises, extending from the point of delivery at the gas 
meter. 
ELECTRIC-READY. A building, project, or portion thereof that contains electrical systems and 
designs that provide capacity for a future retrofit of a Mixed-Fuel Building to an All-Electric 
Building. Electric-Ready includes sufficient space, drainage, electrical conductors or raceways, 

--- Page 110 ---
108 
bus bar capacity, and overcurrent protective devices to provide capacity for a future retrofit to an 
All-Electric Building as specified in the Design Guidelines for Electric-Ready Buildings 
published by the Department of Building Inspection. 
KITCHEN, RESIDENTIAL. That portion in a residential dwelling unit that is a room or area 
used for cooking, food storage and preparation and washing dishes, including associated counter 
tops and cabinets, refrigerator, stove, ovens and floor area. 
MIXED-FUEL BUILDING. A building that uses natural gas or propane as fuel for space 
heating or cooling, exterior heating, decorative uses and lighting, water heating (including pools 
and spas), cooking appliances or clothes drying appliances, onsite generation of electricity 
(except where primarily fueled by onsite digestion of organic material), or contains fixtures, 
piping systems, or infrastructure for natural gas or propane equipment for such uses. 
 
202 Revise the first sentence of the following two definitions under STANDPIPE SYSTEM: 
STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF. Standpipe classes are as follows: 
   Class I system. A system providing [ ← ] 3" (76.2 mm) hose connections to supply water for 
use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams. 
   Class III system. A system providing 1-1/2-inch (38 mm) hose stations to supply water for use 
by building occupants and [ ← ] 3" (76.2 mm) hose connections to supply a larger volume of 
water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION AND USE 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 4 
SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED 
ON OCCUPANCY AND USE 
 
SECTION 406 – MOTOR-VEHICLE-RELATED OCCUPANCIES 
406.3 Add the following section: 
406.3.4 Ventilation. 
   Ventilation shall be provided as follows: Natural ventilation shall be required, and such space 
shall be provided with ventilation outlets in the walls or exterior doors. The total net area of such 
ventilation outlets shall be 200 square inches (0.129 m2) for a space up to 1,000 square feet 
(92.903 m2) in area and shall be increased 30 square inches (0.0194 m2) for each additional 200 
square feet (18.58 m2) of floor area up to maximum floor area of 3,000 square feet (278.709 m2). 

--- Page 111 ---
109 
SECTION 435 – SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR LICENSED 24-
HOUR CARE FACILITIES IN A GROUP R-2.1, R-3.1, R-4 
435.3 Add the following section: 
435.3.5 For detached one- and two-family dwellings, and townhouses not more than three stories 
above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress, buildings housing protective social-
care homes or in occupancies housing inmates who are not restrained need not be of one-hour 
fire-resistive construction when not more than two stories in height. In no case shall individual 
floor areas exceed 3,000 square feet (279 m2). The fire-resistive protection of the exterior walls 
shall not be less than one hour where such walls are located within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the 
property line. Openings within such walls are not permitted. Openings within non-rated walls 
need not be protected. [California Residential Code Section R335.9] 
 
SECTION 456 – FENCES 
456 Add the following section: 
456.1 Fences. Fences on any property containing a Group R Occupancy shall not be higher than 
10 feet (3048 mm). Fences located less than 10 feet (3048 mm) from any public sidewalk shall 
not be higher than 10 feet (3048 mm) unless they are of open-type materials such as chain link 
fabric. Fence height shall be measured from the level of general existing adjacent ground of the 
general area prior to the improvement of the properties. A fence or railing placed on top of the 
retaining wall shall be measured from the top of the wall. 
   Fences constructed wholly or in part of barbed wire are prohibited, except when permitted with 
the express written permission of the Building Official, and the Fire Department in the following 
situations: 
   1.   On top of a fence more than 7 feet (2.134 m) high, protecting a dangerous or hazardous 
area. 
   2.   Within a private area, enclosed by a seven-foot-high (2.134 m) fence, such that entry to the 
area is limited by the outer, nonbarbed fence. 
   3.   In special instances for localized protection, and in areas within or atop a building to isolate 
dangerous conditions. 
 
Chapter 5 
GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 6 
TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 7 
FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES 

--- Page 112 ---
110 
SECTION 707 – FIRE BARRIERS 
707.1 Add a second paragraph to this section as follows: 
   Information technology rooms shall be in accordance with the Fire Code and Electrical Code. 
 
 
Chapter 8 
INTERIOR FINISHES 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
 
Chapter 9 
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
SECTION 901 – GENERAL 
901.4 Add a second paragraph as follows: 
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the California Building Code or other codes or 
regulations, Fire Department connections shall have 3-inch (76.2 mm) National Standard hose 
threads. 
 
SECTION 903 – AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
903.2.8 Add exception 5 as follows: 
   5.   An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or 
alterations are made to existing townhouses, one- and two- family dwellings not more than three 
stories above grade plane that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system installed. 
[California Residential Code Sections R101.2, R313.1 R309.1, R313.2 R309.2]  
 
Table 903.2.11.6 Add a line to the end of the Table as follows: 
TABLE 903.2.11.6 
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS 
  
SECTION SUBJECT 
3202.3.4 Pedestrian Walkways over Public Streets 
  
SECTION 907 – FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS 
907.2.9.1 Revise Item 3 and Item 4 as follows: 
   3.   The building contains more than  [ ← ]  6 dwelling units or sleeping units. 
   4.   Congregate living facilities or congregate residences  [ ← ]  three or more stories in height 
or having an occupant load of 11 or more. 
907.2.9 Add the following section: 
907.2.9.5 Automatic smoke detection system. An automatic smoke detection system that 
activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed 
throughout all interior corridors serving sleeping units. 
Exceptions: 

--- Page 113 ---
111 
   1.   An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior 
corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening 
directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
   2.   An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings when all of the following 
conditions are met: 
      2.1.   The building is equipped throughout with a supervised automatic sprinkler system 
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
      2.2.   The notification devices will activate upon sprinkler water flow; and 
      2.3.   At least one manual pull station is installed in an approved location. 
907.2.11.2 Add the following section: 
907.2.11.2.7  Group R-3 Congregate Living Facilities. Group R-3 congregate living facilities 
having an occupant load of 6 or more shall be provided with a manual fire alarm system. 
SECTION 912 – FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS 
912 Add the following section: 
912.7 Number of connections required. Sprinkler systems requiring a 4-inch (101.6 mm) or 
larger water service shall have two or more inlet connections as necessary to meet hydraulic 
demand. 
 
Chapter 10 
MEANS OF EGRESS 
SECTION 1010 – DOORS, GATES AND TURNSTILES 
1010.1.2 Revise item 4 as follows: 
   4.   Other than the main egress door at the primary entry, doors within or serving a single 
dwelling unit in Groups R-2 and R-3. 
SECTION 1011 – STAIRWAYS 
1011.5.5 Modify the first sentence of the first paragraph as follows: 
   For all occupancies except R-3 one and two family dwellings and townhouses nosings shall 
have a curvature or bevel of not less than 1/16 1 (1.6 mm) but not more than 9/16 1 (14.3 mm) 
from the foremost projection of the tread. Risers shall be solid and vertical or sloped under the 
tread above from the underside of the nosing above at an angle not more than 30 degrees (0.52 
rad) from the vertical. 
1011.5.5 Add a second paragraph as follows: 
   For R-3 one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, the radius of curvature at the nosing 
shall be no greater than 9/16 inch (14 mm). A nosing not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm) but not 
more than 1-1/4 inches (32 mm) shall be provided on stairways with solid risers. The greatest 
nosing projection shall not exceed the smallest nosing projection by more than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) 
between two stories, including the nosing at the level of floors and landings. Beveling of nosings 
shall not exceed 1/2 inch (12.7 mm). 
   Exception: A nosing projection is not required where the tread depth is not less than 11 inches 
(279 mm). [CRC R311.7.5.3 R318.7.5.3] 
1011.5.5.1 Modify the first sentence of the first paragraph as follows: 
For all occupancies except R-3 one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses the leading edge 
(nosings) of treads shall project not more than 1¼ inches (32 mm) beyond the tread below. 
1011.12 Add a sentence to the end of the Exception as follows: 

--- Page 114 ---
112 
   Exception: Other than where required by Section 1011.12.1, in buildings without an occupied 
occupiable roof access to the roof from the top story shall be permitted to be by an alternating 
tread device, a ships ladder or a permanent ladder. Stairs or ladders used only to attend 
equipment or window wells are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
1011.12 Add section as follows: 
1011.12.3 Stairway replacement. Stairways that replace existing stairways in residential 
occupancies and which complied with the code in effect at the time they were constructed, and 
which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant 
load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy, may be reconstructed in the same 
configuration and construction as the existing stairways. 
SECTION 1012 – RAMPS 
1012.2 Add an exception as follows: 
   Exception: For R-3 one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, where it is technically 
infeasible to comply because of site constraints, ramps may have a maximum slope of one unit 
vertical in eight units horizontal (12.5 percent). [CRC R311.8.1 R318.8.1] 
SECTION 1013 – EXIT SIGNS 
1013.1 Add the following sentence after the exceptions: 
   Doorways or other openings leading to a fire escape, except within individual dwelling units, 
shall be provided with a sign reading “FIRE ESCAPE” in letters not less than 6 inches (152 mm) 
high, in high contrast with the background. 
SECTION 1015 – GUARDS 
1015.4 Revise exception 1 as follows: 
   1.   For occupancies other than R-3 and townhouses, from a height of 36 inches (914 mm) to 42 
inches (1067 mm), guards shall not have openings that allow passage of a sphere 4 3/8 inches 
(111 mm) in diameter. 
SECTION 1016 – EXIT ACCESS 
1016.2 Add item 7 8 as follows: 
   78.   For one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses, the means of egress is allowed to 
pass through rooms and intervening spaces except garages. [CRC R311.1R318.1] 
1016.3 Add a section as follows: 
1016.3 Vertical egress. For habitable levels or basements in R-3 occupancies or townhouses that 
are located more than one story above or more than one story below an egress door, the 
maximum travel distance from any occupied point to a stairway or ramp that provides egress 
from such habitable level or basement shall not exceed 50 feet (15240 mm). [CRC R311.4 
R318.4] 
 
Chapter 10A 
SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 
SECTION 1001A – SCOPE 
1001A.1 General. This chapter shall apply to all Group R, Division 1 and R, Division 2 
Occupancies. 
1001A.2 Apartment houses. Apartment houses (Group R, Division 1 and R, Division 2 
Occupancies) and buildings containing more than two residential condominium units shall meet 
the security requirements of this chapter. 

--- Page 115 ---
113 
1001A.3 Hotels and motels. Hotels and motels shall comply with the security requirements of 
this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter, any building open to the public and offering 
accommodations to transient persons for compensation shall be considered as a hotel or motel. 
SECTION 1002A – DEFINITIONS 
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
   AUXILIARY LOCKING DEVICE is a secondary locking system added to the primary locking 
system to provide additional security. 
   BURGLARY-RESISTANT GLAZING MATERIALS are materials which are defined in 
ANSI/UL Standard 972. 
   DEADBOLT is a lock bolt which must be actuated by a key, a knob or thumb-turn and when 
projected becomes locked against return by end pressure, and does not have spring action, as a 
latch bolt does. A SINGLE CYLINDER DEADBOLT is a deadbolt lock which is activated from 
the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumb-turn lever or similar mechanism. 
A DOUBLE CYLINDER DEADBOLT is a deadbolt which can only be activated by a key from 
both interior and exterior. 
   DEADLATCH or DEADLOCKING LATCH BOLT is a spring-actuated latch bolt having a 
beveled end and an incorporated plunger which, when depressed, automatically locks the 
projected latch bolt against return by end pressure. 
   PRIMARY LOCKING DEVICE is the single locking system on a door or window unit whose 
function is to prevent unauthorized intrusion. 
   WINDOW LOCKING DEVICE is part of a window assembly which is intended to prevent 
movement of the movable sash, and may be the sash lock or sash operator. 
SECTION 1003A – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
SECURITY 
1003A.1 Clearances. The clearance between the door and the frame and between meeting edges 
of doors swinging in pairs shall not exceed 1/8 inch (3.2 mm). The clearance between the door 
and the floor with either flush or raised sill shall be not more than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm). 
1003A.2 Door assemblies. Excluding main entry doors, all exterior swinging doors, and 
swinging interior and exterior entry doors, including assemblies and related hardware, which are 
directly accessible from the ground level or by stairs or by ramp, or from roof areas, or parking 
lot, or garage areas, shall meet the requirements of Grade 20 of ANSI/ASTM F476, Standard 
Test Methods for Security of Swinging Door Assemblies. 
   All such doors shall be self-closing continuously locked, and openable from the interior with 
no special effort or knowledge or key. Where electrically operated locks are used, they must be 
self-latching and locking and shall have manual release capability from the interior requiring no 
special effort or knowledge or key. 
1003A.2.1 Main entrance. All main entry doors, including electrically operated main entry 
doors, shall be provided with a primary locking device. “Main entry doors” shall be defined as 
exterior doors leading directly into the lobby, registration areas or employee entrances. 
1003A.2.2 Viewer. Each door shall be provided with a minimum 135-degree viewer which does 
not have sighting capability when viewed from the outside. Mounting height shall not exceed 58 
inches (1473 mm). 
1003A.3 Fire-rated door assemblies. Fire-rated door assemblies shall meet the requirements of 
Grade 20, ANSI/ASTM F476. 

--- Page 116 ---
114 
1003A.4 Glazing. All glazing within 40 inches (1016 mm) of any locking mechanism of exterior 
and interior dwelling unit doors shall be of safety glass or burglar-resistant glazing. This 
requirement shall not exempt the swinging door assembly standards of Grade 20 of ANSI/ 
ASTM F476. 
1003A.5 Metal gates. Metal gates shall conform to the following: 
   1.   Latch bolt protected by a security plate. 
   2.   Hinges, bolts, screws shall be nonremovable. 
   3.   Areas within 40 inches (1016 mm) of latch mechanism protected by mesh screen or 
approved equal. 
   4.   Interior release mechanism protected with cover. 
   5.   For electrically operated locks, see Section 1003A.2. 
1003A.6 Sliding glass doors. Sliding glass door assemblies shall be so designed that the door 
cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position. 
   In addition to the primary locking device, all sliding glass doors shall have an auxiliary locking 
device permanently mounted and not accessible from the exterior of the building but easily 
accessible from the interior. 
1003A.7 Sliding glass windows. Sliding glass window assemblies shall be so designed that the 
moving panel cannot be lifted from the track while in a closed position. 
1003A.8 Parking areas. Parking space numbering shall not correspond to the guest room or 
dwelling unit number. 
   Exterior parking areas and access thereto shall be provided with a minimum of 1/2 foot-candle 
(5.38 lx) of light on the parking surface when the area is unoccupied. Lighting devices shall be 
protected by weather- and vandalism-resistant covers. 
SECTION 1004A – SPECIAL HOTEL AND MOTEL SECURITY 
REQUIREMENTS 
1004A.1 Entry doors to guest rooms. 
   EXCEPTION: Residential care facilities licensed by the State of California under Title 22 of 
the California Code of Regulations shall not be required to comply with the requirements of this 
subsection. 
   Locks shall be a combination of minimum 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) throw deadlatch with a 
minimum 1-inch (25.4 mm) deadbolt. 
   All locks shall be capable of locking out all keys, except the emergency keys for guest privacy 
while inside the room, and so constructed that both deadlatch and deadbolt are retracted 
simultaneously by a single knob or lever. 
1004A.2 Communicating door between guest rooms. Communicating doors between guest 
rooms if not required to be fire-rated shall meet the requirements of Grade 20 of ANSI/ASTM 
F476 and be of minimum 1 3/8-inch (35 mm) bonded wood core or approved equal. 
1004A.3 Roof openings. All skylights leading directly to guest rooms, offices and enclosed 
commercial space shall be provided with burglary-resistant glazing as defined in Section 1002A. 
1004A.4 Message and key box – front desk. The message and room key location at the front 
desk shall not be visible from public view so as to determine an unoccupied room. 
SECTION 1005A – SPECIAL APARTMENT HOUSE AND 
CONDOMINIUM SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 

--- Page 117 ---
115 
1005A.1 Voice communications. A two-way voice communication system shall be provided 
between the common entry door and all interior dwelling units. All systems shall provide direct 
communication. 
1005A.2 Lighting. Lighting shall be a minimum of 1/2 foot-candle (5.38 lx) of light on the 
ground surface from the street to the entry door. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather- 
and vandalism-resistant covers. 
1005A.3 Master keying. Exterior and main entrance door locks shall not be on any master key 
system. 
1005A.4 Entry doors. Entry doors and door assemblies shall comply with the following: 
1005A.4.1 Locks shall be combination 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) throw deadlatch with a minimum 1-
inch (25.4 mm) throw deadbolt, and so constructed that both the deadlatch and deadbolt retract 
simultaneously by knob or lever. The deadbolt shall have the ability to be thrown from the 
exterior. 
1005A.5 Exit doors. All exit doors from corridors to exit stairways and from interior stairwells 
and interior fire escapes shall meet the requirements of Grade 20 of ANSI/ ASTM F476 and be 
continuously locked from the outside. 
   Locking devices shall be self-latching or self-locking and shall be openable from the interior 
with no special effort or knowledge or key. [See Section 1010.1.9. 1010.2] 
1005A.6 Glazed openings. Glazed openings accessible from the ground level, by stairs, ramps, 
parking lots or garage areas, shall be with approved safety glass or burglar-resistant glazing as 
defined in Section 1002A. Protective iron grill work may only be installed where it does not 
interfere with the required means of egress. 
1005A.7 Roof openings. All skylights leading directly to interior corridors, stairwells, dwelling 
units and utility rooms shall be provided with burglary-resistant glazing as defined in 
Section 1002A. 
1005A.8 Garage doors. All doors of the sectional overhead, one-piece overhead, swing or 
sliding types used on the exterior of a building shall conform to the following standards: 
1005A.8.1 Panels of wood doors shall be at least 5/16-inch (7.94 mm) thick, except sectional 
overhead doors may have panels 1/4-inch (6.35 mm) thick. 
1005A.8.2 Aluminum doors shall be constructed of at least 0.025-inch (0.635 mm) thick sheet 
aluminum, riveted, welded or bolted to framing members at least 12 inches (305 mm) on center. 
1005A.8.3 Steel doors shall be constructed of at least 0.023-inch (0.584 mm) thick galvanized 
steel, riveted, welded or bolted to framing members at least 12 inches (305 mm) on center. 
1005A.8.4 Fiberglass sectional doors shall be constructed of formed fiberglass panels of density 
of at least 5 1/2 oz. per square foot (1678 g/m2), pressure sealed to aluminum framing members. 
1005A.8.5 Overhead doors shall be made lockable by either: 
   For doors 16 feet (4877 mm) wide or less, a slide bolt – minimum diameter 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) 
minimum projection 1-1/2 inches (38 mm) – locking into the door jamb, capable of utilizing a 
padlock with a minimum 9/32-inch (7.14 mm) shackle. For doors over 16 feet (4877 mm) wide, 
except sectional doors, two slide bolt locks shall be required. Slide bolt assemblies shall be 
attached to the door with bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior. 
   Electrical operator with automatic locking capability, either inherently in the mechanism or as 
an added feature. 
   By at least one single-bar lock mounted in the end stile, with locking bar or bolt extending into 
the receiving guide a minimum of 1 inch (25.4 mm), and with minimum five-pin tumble 

--- Page 118 ---
116 
operation. For doors over 16 feet (4877 mm) wide, except sectional doors, two single-bar locks 
shall be required. 
   Center locking-handle devices will require actuating straps to be enclosed by rigid conduits 
securely fastened to the door. 
1005A.8.6 Swinging garage doors shall be lockable by a cylinder deadbolt. 
1005A.8.7 Doors operated by electrical means shall be provided with manual release capability 
from the interior, requiring no special effort or knowledge or key. 
1005A.8.8 Manually operated chain-driven garage doors shall require approval of the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 
 
Chapter 11 
RESERVED 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 11A 
HOUSING ACCESSIBILITY 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 11B 
ACCESSIBILITY TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS, 
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS, COMMERCIAL 
BUILDINGS AND PUBLICLY HOUSING 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Add chapter as follows: 
 
Chapter 11C 
RESERVED 
Add chapter as follows: 
 
Chapter 11D 
MANDATORY ACCESSIBILITY 
IMPROVEMENTS    FOR BUILDINGS WITH A 
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION 
SECTION 1101D – SCOPE 
   Any building or portion of a building with a Place of Public Accommodation subject to the 
requirements of Chapter 11B of this Code is within the scope of this Chapter. 

--- Page 119 ---
117 
   Exception: A building that was constructed under a building or site permit application filed on 
or after January 1, 2002. 
   A building constructed under the Building Code in effect on or after January 1, 2002 is 
presumed to be accessible to persons with disabilities and will be exempt from this Chapter 11D. 
1101D.1. Compliance with Federal or State Laws. Nothing in this Chapter 11D is intended to 
relieve the Owner or the operator of a Place of Public Accommodation of their obligation to 
comply with the requirements of any Federal or State law, including but not limited to the 
Americans with Disabilities Act, or to modify or extend the time for compliance with any such 
law. 
1101D.2. Contractual Obligations. Nothing in this Chapter 11D is intended to interfere with 
any contractual obligations between the Owner of a building within the scope of this Chapter and 
any lessee of space within the building. 
SECTION 1102D – DEFINITIONS 
   For the purposes of this Chapter 11D, the following definitions shall apply: 
   “Building Official.” The Director of the Department or the Director’s designee. 
   “CASp Inspector.” A person who has been certified by the State of California as a certified 
access specialist authorized to inspect a Place of Public Accommodation for compliance with 
construction-related accessibility standards. 
   “Department.” The Department of Building Inspection. 
   “Disability Access Compliance Unit” or “Compliance Unit.” The Unit within the Department 
established under Section 1104D of this Chapter. 
   “Owner.” The owner of a building within the scope of this Chapter 11D. 
   “Place of Public Accommodation.” As defined in Chapter 2 of the Building Code and 42 USC 
Section 12181(7) of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended from time to time. 
SECTION 1103D – DEPARTMENT COORDINATION 
   The Department shall coordinate with the Planning Department, the Department of Public 
Works, Mayor’s Office on Disability, and other appropriate City departments and offices to do 
the following: 
   (a)   Provide information to project applicants who own or operate a Place of Public 
Accommodation regarding the obligations of property owners, managers, and business tenants 
regarding compliance with disability access requirements under the California Building Code 
and the Americans with Disabilities Act, upon submittal of a project application; and 
   (b)   Develop and distribute outreach tools, such as brochures and technical information sheets, 
to assist project applicants who own or operate a Place of Public Accommodation in 
understanding said requirements. 
SECTION 1104D – DISABILITY ACCESS COMPLIANCE UNIT 
   The Building Official shall establish within the Department a Disability Access Compliance 
Unit to enforce this Chapter 11D and to perform such other duties as the Building Official shall 
require. The Unit shall have at least one CASp Inspector from the Department and such other 
departmental employees as the Building Official deems appropriate. The Unit shall consult and 
coordinate with other City agencies with review authority over the permits necessary to comply 
with the requirements of this Chapter, including but not limited to the Planning Department and 
Department of Public Works, and any other City agencies that the Building Official determines 
are necessary or desirable to achieve the purposes of this Chapter. 

--- Page 120 ---
118 
SECTION 1105D – REPORTS TO THE MAYOR’S OFFICE ON 
DISABILITY AND THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS 
   Within six months of the effective date of Board of Supervisors Ordinance No. 22-25, the 
Department shall report to the Mayor’s Office on Disability, or any successor department or 
office, regarding its progress in directing resources to strengthen disability access reviews and 
inspections of small businesses serving the public. Within twelve months of the effective date of 
said ordinance, the Department shall report to the Board of Supervisors regarding its efforts to 
strengthen disability access reviews and inspections of small businesses serving the public, 
including any successes related to these efforts. Within twelve months of the effective date of 
said ordinance, the Office of Small Business and the Mayor’s Office on Disability, or any 
successor department or office, shall report to the Board of Supervisors regarding their efforts to 
further advance accessibility for all persons with disabilities in partnership with local businesses. 
SECTION 1106D – NOTICE 
   The Department shall post on its website the requirements of this Chapter 11D. The 
Department shall also prepare any administrative bulletins, brochures, or other materials that the 
Building Official determines are necessary or desirable to notify property owners and tenants 
about the requirements of this Chapter. 
SECTION 1107D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1108D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1109D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1110D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1111D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1112D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1113D – [REPEALED] 
SECTION 1114D – [REPEALED] 
 
Chapter 12 
INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT 
SECTION 1202 – VENTILATION 
1202.5 Add a second paragraph and a third paragraph as follows: 
   In other than high-rise buildings, public corridors, public hallways and other public spaces 
having openings into adjoining dwelling units, guest rooms, or congregate residences within R-1 
and R-2 Occupancies, shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior 
openings with an area of not less than 1/25 of the floor area of such rooms or spaces with a 
minimum of 4 square feet (0.37 m2). 
   In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilating system 
may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in public 
corridors, public hallways and other public spaces having openings into adjoining dwelling units, 
guest rooms, or congregate residences with R-2 occupancies, with a minimum of 7-1/2 cubic feet 
per minute (3-1/2 L/s) of outside air per occupant during such time as the building is occupied. 
 

--- Page 121 ---
119 
1202.6 Add a second paragraph as follows: 
   For all buildings containing any sensitive land use located within the Air Pollutant Exposure 
Zone, as determined by the Director of Public Health pursuant to Article 38 of the San Francisco 
Health Code, that are: 
   (a)   Newly constructed; 
   (b)   Undergoing a “Major Alteration to Existing Building” as defined by the San Francisco 
Green Building Code; or 
   (c)   Applying for a San Francisco Planning Department-permitted Change of Use, such 
buildings shall incorporate an enhanced ventilation system designed and constructed to be in 
compliance with San Francisco Health Code Article 38. 
SECTION 1204 – LIGHTING 
1204.1 Add an exception after the first paragraph: 
   Exception: Habitable rooms (excluding kitchens, home offices and media rooms) within a 
dwelling unit or congregate residence shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior 
glazed openings in accordance with Section 1204.2. 
1204.2.2 Add the following paragraphs after the Exceptions: 
   The depth of all structural projections, including balconies, decks, porches, rooms or roofs, 
shall not exceed 9 feet (2.134 m) when extending over exterior wall openings that provide 
required natural light or natural ventilation for spaces intended for human occupancy. 
   The height of a balcony, deck or porch shall not be less than 7 feet (2.134 m) measured from 
the floor to the lowest projection above. 
1204.4 Revise this section as follows: 
1204.4 Stairway Illumination. Stairways within dwelling units and exterior stairways serving a 
dwelling unit shall have an illumination level on tread runs and landings of not less than 1 
footcandle (11 lux). Stairs in other occupancies shall be governed by Chapter 10. 
   Exception: An artificial light source is not required at the top and bottom landing, provided an 
artificial light source is located directly over each stairway section. 
SECTION 1206 – SOUND TRANSMISSION 
1206 Add the following sections: 
1206.6 Definitions. The following definitions apply to Sections 1206.4 1206.6 through 1206.9 of 
this Code. 
   COMMUNITY NOISE EQUIVALENT LEVEL (CNEL) is a metric similar to the Ldn, except 
that a 5 dB adjustment is added to the equivalent continuous sound exposure level for evening 
hours (7 p.m. to 10 p.m.) in addition to the 10 dB nighttime adjustment used in the Ldn. 
   DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL (Ldn) is the A-weighted equivalent continuous 
sound exposure level for a 24-hour period with a 10 dB adjustment added to sound levels 
occurring during nighttime hours (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.). 
   NORMALIZED A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL DIFFERENCE (Dn) means for a 
specified source room sound spectrum, the difference, in decibels, between the average sound 
levels produced in two rooms after adjustment to the expected acoustical conditions when the 
receiving room under test is normally furnished. 
1206.7 Exterior Sound Transmission Control. 
1206.7.1 Application. Residential structures located in noise critical areas, such as in proximity 
to highways, county roads, city streets, railroads, rapid transit lines, airports, nighttime 
entertainment venues, or industrial areas, shall be designed to prevent the intrusion of exterior 
noises beyond levels prescribed by the Municipal Code. Proper design to accomplish this goal 

--- Page 122 ---
120 
shall include, but not be limited to, orientation of the residential structure, setbacks, shielding, 
and sound insulation of the building. 
1206.7.2 Allowable interior noise levels. Interior noise levels attributable to exterior sources 
shall not exceed 45 dB in any habitable room. The noise metric shall be either the day-night 
average sound level (Ldn) or the community noise equivalent level (CNEL), whichever results in 
a higher measurement of noise level. 
1206.7.3 Other noise sources. Residential structures to be located where the Ldn or CNEL 
exceeds 60 dB shall require an acoustical analysis showing that the proposed design will limit 
exterior noise to the prescribed allowable interior level. The Planning Department’s map titled 
Areas Potentially Requiring Noise Insulations, and similar maps and guidance produced by the 
Planning Department, shall be used where possible to identify sites with noise levels potentially 
greater than 60 dB. 
1206.8 Compliance. 
   (a)   Evidence of compliance with Section 1206.7 shall consist of submittal of an acoustical 
analysis report, prepared under the supervision of a person experienced in the field of acoustical 
engineering, with the application for a building permit. The report shall show topographical 
relationships of noise sources and dwelling sites, identification of noise sources and their 
characteristics, predicted noise spectra and levels at the exterior of the proposed dwelling 
structure considering present and future land usage, the basis or bases for the prediction 
(measured or obtained from published data), noise attenuation measures to be applied and an 
analysis of the noise insulation effectiveness of the proposed construction showing that the 
prescribed interior noise level requirements are met. 
   (b)   If interior allowable noise levels are met by requiring that windows be unopenable or 
closed the design for the structure must also specify a ventilation or air-conditioning system to 
provide a habitable interior environment. The ventilation system must not compromise the 
dwelling unit or guest room noise reduction. 
1206.9 Field Testing. 
   (a)   When inspection indicates that the construction is not in accordance with the approved 
design, or that the noise reduction is compromised due to sound leaks or flanking paths, field 
testing may be required. A test report showing compliance or noncompliance with prescribed 
interior allowable levels shall be submitted to the building official. 
   (b)   Field measurements of outdoor sound levels shall generally follow the guidelines prepared 
by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) in ASTM E1014. 
   (c)   Field measurements of the A-weighted airborne sound insulation of buildings from 
exterior sources shall generally follow the guidelines prepared by the American Society for 
Testing and Materials (ASTM) in ASTM E966. 
   (d)   For the purpose of this Section 1206.9, sound level differences measured in unoccupied 
units shall be normalized to a receiving room reverberation time of one-half second. Sound level 
differences measured in occupied units shall not be normalized to a standard reverberation time. 
1206.10 The Department of Building Inspection shall consult with the Planning Department to 
ensure that notice to sponsors of residential development projects affected by Sections 1206.6 
through 1206.9 are provided with notice of the requirements of this Section as soon as 
practicable in the project approval process. 
SECTION 1208 – INTERIOR SPACE DIMENSIONS 
1208.4 1208.5 Revise paragraph 1 of this section and add paragraphs 5 and 6 of this section as follows: 

--- Page 123 ---
121 
1208.4 1208.5. Efficiency dwelling units. [ ← ] Efficiency dwelling units shall comply with the 
following: 
   1.   The unit’s habitable space shall comply with Sections 1208.1 through 1208.4. The unit 
shall be occupied by no more than two persons and have a living room of not less than 150 
square feet of floor area. An additional 100 square feet (9.3 m2) of floor area shall be provided 
for each occupant of such unit in excess of two. 
   2.   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
   3.   For other than Accessible, adaptable dwelling units, the unit shall be provided with a 
kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigerator, each having a clear working space of not less 
than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be 
provided. 
   4.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and 
bathtub or shower. 
   5.   The total area of the unit shall be no less than 220 square feet, which area shall be 
measured from the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the unit and shall include closets, 
bathrooms, kitchen, living, and sleeping areas. 
   6.   Subsections 1 - 5 apply only to new construction of a structure or building. For purposes of 
the preceding sentence, new construction shall mean the creation of an entirely new structure or 
building and shall not apply to improvement, renovation, rehabilitation, or any other change to 
an existing structure or building. Existing buildings or structures are subject only to Subsections 
1 - 4 except that for purposes of Subsection 1 the unit shall have a living room of not less than 
220 square feet (20.4 m2) of floor area for up to two occupants. 
SECTION 1210 –  [ ← ]  TOILET, BATHROOM AND 
LACTATION ROOM REQUIREMENTS 
1210 Add the following sections: 
1210.4. Baby diaper-changing accommodations. At least one Baby Diaper-Changing 
Accommodation that is open and available for use by women and one that is open and available 
for use by men, or a single Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodation that is open and available for 
use by all genders, shall be installed and maintained in a newly constructed or substantially 
renovated Public Service Establishment at each floor level containing a toilet room available for 
use by the public. 
   Exceptions: 
   1.   A Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodation shall not be required if the Building Official, or 
his or her designee, determines that it cannot be installed and comply with City, State, or Federal 
laws relating to access to persons with disabilities, including Section 11B-226.4 of this Code. 
   2.   A Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodation shall not be required if the Building Official, or 
his or her designee, determines that the installation is infeasible due to spatial or structural 
limitations. 
1210.4.1. Definitions. For purposes of this Section 1210.4, the following definitions shall apply. 
   “Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodation” shall mean a safe, sanitary, and convenient baby 
diaper- changing station, or similar amenity. Such accommodations may include, but are not 
limited to, work surfaces, stations, decks, and tables in women’s and men’s toilet rooms or all-
gender toilet rooms. 
   “Public Service Establishment” shall mean a facility as specified in Subsections (2), (3), (4), 
(5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), (12), and (13) of the definition of Place of Public 

--- Page 124 ---
122 
Accommodation in Chapter 2 of this Code, but shall not include any such facility where entry by 
minors is prohibited by law. 
   “Substantially Renovated” shall be limited to renovation of a toilet room, and shall mean any 
addition, alteration, or repair project to toilet rooms, performed under a building permit with a 
cost of construction of $50,000 or more for renovation of one or more toilet rooms. 
1210.4.2. Signage. Each Public Service Establishment subject to Section 1210.4 shall provide 
signage at or near its entrance stating “Baby Diaper-Changing Accommodation Inside.” This 
signage shall be posted in compliance with Section 11B-216.2 of this Code. In a building 
encompassing multiple establishments and having a central directory, the location of all such 
accommodations shall be indicated on the directory. 
1210.4.3. Nothing in this Section 1210.4 shall be construed as requiring or authorizing (1) a 
reduction in the number of toilet facilities that are required by Title 24 of the California Code of 
Regulations or (2) a reduction in the number of toilet facilities accessible to persons with 
disabilities that are otherwise required under either Title 24 of the California Code of 
Regulations or the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
1210.5. Lactation Rooms. 
   (a)   Specifications. A Lactation Room shall meet the following requirements. The room shall 
be at least 50 square feet. It shall include at least one electrical outlet per lactation station and an 
additional outlet per room for a refrigerator, a sink with hot and cold running water, and a door 
that can be locked from the inside. The room shall be located no more than 500 feet or within 
two adjacent floors from the farthest employee workspace that it is designated to serve. The 
room shall meet all applicable local, state, and federal accessibility requirements, including 
requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act and Chapter 11B of the Building Code. 
   (b)   Required Construction of Lactation Rooms. A Project Sponsor shall construct 
Lactation Room(s) in buildings designated for Group A, B, E, F, I, M, or R-1 use as defined 
by Chapter 3 of the Building Code when there are tenant improvements of the building that meet 
the following criteria: 
      (1)   when there is tenant improvement project for the interior of the building, and 
      (2)   the gross square footage of the interior space designated for Employee only use (i.e., 
space not designated for public use) and included in the project is at least 15,000 square feet, and 
      (3)   the estimated cost of the project stated in the building application is over $1,000,000. 
   If these three requirements are met, the project shall include a Lactation Room(s), as follows:  
Employee Occupancy Load of Building Number of Lactation Rooms or Stations 
50-150 1 
151-300 2 
301-500 3 
501-1000 4 
1001-2000 8 
2001-4000 11 
For each additional 900 Employees in excess of 4000 1   
   If the tenant improvement project contains existing Lactation Rooms that comply with this 
Section, such rooms may fulfill the requirements of this subsection (b). 
   (c)   The requirement for a Lactation Room to have a sink, as specified by subsection (a) of this 
Section shall not apply where the project does not involve plumbing work. 

--- Page 125 ---
123 
   (d)   Lactation Stations. Where multiple Lactation Rooms are required for a project under 
subsection (b), the Project Sponsor may fulfill the requirement by merging the required rooms 
and the square footage specified under subsection (a) and providing one room with multiple 
lactation stations or multiple rooms with multiple lactation stations. The total square footage 
provided must meet the minimum for the number of rooms required by subsection (b). The 
room(s) must otherwise satisfy the requirements of this Section 1210.5, except that only one sink 
is required in a room with multiple lactation stations. 
   (e)   Other Requirements of Lactation Rooms. Any Lactation Room required by this Section 
shall be designated for purposes of lactation and shall not be converted for any other use. Each 
room shall have a sign outside the door indicating that it is a Lactation Room. The sign shall 
comply with Section 11B-216.2 of the Building Code. The room may be temporarily used for 
purposes other than lactation only when the room is not being used by any employee to 
accommodate the employee’s request for lactation accommodation under Article 31 of the Labor 
and Employment Code. Each lactation station shall have an electrical outlet and each Lactation 
Room shall have one additional electrical outlet to accommodate a refrigerator for purposes of 
storing breastmilk. 
   (f)   For purposes of this Section 1210.5, “Project Sponsor” means the party that constructs the 
tenant improvements for an end user’s occupancy. 
 
Chapter 13 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Add chapter as follows: 
 
Chapter 13A 
COMMERCIAL WATER CONSERVATION 
SECTION 1301A – TITLE 
   This chapter shall be known as the “Commercial Water Conservation Ordinance.” 
SECTION 1302A – INTENT 
   It is the intent of this chapter to conserve existing water supplies by managing the overall 
demand for water in commercial buildings, including tourist hotels and motels, by requiring the 
installation of water conservation devices in commercial buildings upon the occurrence of 
specific events and in any event no later than January 1, 2017. 
SECTION 1303A – DEFINITIONS 
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
   ACCESSIBLE means there is sufficient space in which to install the specified water and 
energy conservation measure without significant alteration to the structure. For ducts, plenums or 
pipes, “accessible” shall mean all ductwork, plenums or pipes located in mechanical rooms, on 
roofs and around all air handling units. In addition, pipes located above movable ceiling panels 
shall be considered accessible, but not ducts or plenums. 

--- Page 126 ---
124 
   ACCESSIBLE ATTIC SPACE means a space between a ceiling joist and roof rafter where the 
vertical clear height from the top of the bottom chord of the truss or ceiling joist to the underside 
of the roof sheeting at the roof ridge is greater than 18 inches (957 mm). 
   BUILDING OCCUPANCY means OCCUPANCY as defined in Chapter 3 of this code and 
shall also, where practicable, include the primary business activity of the property as classified 
by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC). 
   BUILDING TYPE means the type of building construction, as defined in Chapter 6 of this 
code, and shall take into consideration whether the building is a high-rise building as defined by 
Section 403 of this code. 
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING means any privately owned building except those residential 
buildings and portions of mixed residential- commercial buildings that are subject to the energy 
or water conservation requirements of Chapter 12 or Chapter 12A of the San Francisco Housing 
Code (Residential Energy Conservation Ordinance and Residential Water Conservation 
Ordinance). 
   COST-EFFECTIVE means having a simple economic payback that does not exceed four 
years or the expected life of an energy conservation measure, whichever is shorter. 
   ESTABLISHED CONTRACTOR’S COST means the contractor’s fee, including labor and 
material, plus the engineer’s fee to do the required work, provided that the engineer’s fees do not 
exceed the schedule of fees provided by the Building Official. 
   PERMIT APPLICANT means the person listed on the building permit application as the 
owner or lessee of the building. 
   QUALIFIED INSPECTOR means an inspector defined in Section 1314A, who is authorized 
to perform a water conservation inspection. 
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL means a person regularly engaged in the field of making 
repairs, adjustments and inspection of energy-using equipment contained in HVAC, lighting or 
service hot water systems. 
   SERVICE HOT WATER means the supply of hot water for domestic or commercial purposes 
other than comfort heating. 
   SIMPLE ECONOMIC PAYBACK means the time needed to recover a conservation 
investment on the basis of expected energy savings at current energy costs. Simple economic 
payback is expressed in years, and is calculated by dividing the established contractor’s cost of a 
conservation measure by the estimated dollar savings in the first year. Available tax credits, 
incentives and future energy costs are not considered in the calculation. 
   WATER CONSERVATION INSPECTION means inspection of a commercial building for 
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
SECTION 1304A – RULES AND GUIDELINES 
1304A.1 Adopt rules. The Building Official, in cooperation with the General Manager of the 
Public Utilities Commission and other advisors as the Building Official may deem appropriate, 
shall adopt reasonable rules and guidelines implementing the provisions and intent of this 
chapter and shall make them available to the public along with the informational brochure 
described in Section 1307A. The Building Official, in cooperation with the General Manager of 
the Public Utilities Commission, may amend these rules and guidelines from time to time after 
considering public input. 
1304A.2 Inspection procedures. The Building Official shall include coverage of this chapter’s 
requirements in the Water Inspection Procedures established by the Department. 
SECTION 1305A – CIVIL REMEDIES 

--- Page 127 ---
125 
1305A.1 Abatement. A commercial building shall constitute a nuisance under the terms of 
Section 102A of this code when the installation of a water conservation measure in a commercial 
building is required pursuant to this chapter and the water conservation measure has not been 
installed. 
   The nuisance shall be abated by civil action pursuant to procedures set forth in Section 102A of 
this code for unsafe buildings; provided, however, that in no event shall any violation constitute 
a misdemeanor. 
SECTION 1306A – REQUIREMENTS 
1306A.1 Building additions. For building additions where the sum of concurrent building 
permits by the same permit applicant would increase the floor area of the space in a building by 
more than ten percent, the permit applicant shall obtain a valid water conservation inspection and 
shall comply with the applicable water conservation measures required by this chapter as a 
condition for issuance of a Certificate of Final Completion and Occupancy by the Department 
upon completion of the addition. 
1306A.1.1 Scope. This subsection shall apply to the entire building. 
1306A.2 Building alterations and improvements. 
1306A.2.1 For alterations or improvements where the total construction cost estimated in the 
building permit is greater than $150,000, as a condition for issuance of a Certificate of Final 
Completion and Occupancy, or final permit sign off, by the Department upon completion of the 
alterations or improvements, the permit applicant shall obtain a valid water conservation 
inspection and shall install the applicable water conservation devices required by this chapter 
that serve the specific area of alteration or improvement. 
1306A.2.2 Notwithstanding Section 1306A.2.1, for any alterations or improvements to a room 
containing any of the water conservation devices identified in Section 1313A, as a condition for 
issuance of a Certificate of Final Completion and Occupancy or final permit sign off by the 
Department upon completion of the alterations or improvements, the permit applicant shall 
install the applicable water conservation devices required by this chapter in that room. 
1306A.3 On or before January 1, 2017, all commercial buildings shall be in compliance with this 
chapter, and the owner or the owner’s authorized representative shall cause a water conservation 
inspection to be completed, and shall have a certificate of compliance on file with the 
Department for the entire building, or the entire portion of the mixed residential and commercial 
building that is subject to the required water compliance measures identified in Section 1313A. 
SECTION 1307A – INFORMATIONAL BROCHURE 
1307A.1 The Department shall make available to the public an informational brochure 
specifying the water conservation requirements. 
SECTION 1308A – POSTPONEMENTS OF REQUIREMENTS 
1308A.1 Postponement for demolition. The duty of an owner or permit applicant to comply 
with inspection and water conservation requirements applicable to any portion of a building 
subject to this chapter shall be postponed for one year from the date of issuance of a demolition 
permit for said building. If the building is demolished and a certificate of completion is issued by 
the Department before the end of the one-year postponement, the requirements of this chapter 
shall not apply. If the building is not demolished after the expiration of one year, the provisions 
of this chapter shall apply, subject to appeal, even though the demolition permit is still in effect 
or a new demolition permit has been issued. 

--- Page 128 ---
126 
SECTION 1309A – EARLY COMPLIANCE WITH WATER 
CONSERVATION MEASURES 
1309A.1 Early compliance. To encourage early compliance with the requirements of this 
chapter, compliance pursuant to Section 1311A may be completed at any time before compliance 
would otherwise be required. In the event of early compliance, a water conservation inspection 
shall be completed and a certificate of compliance shall be filed with the Department in 
accordance with Section 1311A. 
SECTION 1310A – WATER CONSERVATION INSPECTIONS 
1310A.1 Inspections. A water conservation inspection which satisfies the requirements of this 
chapter shall be performed as required by this chapter. 
SECTION 1311A – PROOF OF COMPLIANCE WITH WATER 
CONSERVATION MEASURES 
1311A.1 Inspection form. The Department shall provide standardized forms, that may be paper 
and/or electronic suitable for conducting a valid water conservation inspection and certifying 
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The inspection form shall be completed and 
signed by a qualified inspector, furnished to the permit applicant, building owner or the owner’s 
authorized representative, and submitted to the Department in accordance with this Section. 
1311A.2 Certificate of compliance. When all of the water conservation requirements have been 
met, a certificate of compliance shall be signed and submitted to the Department. 
1311A.3 Public records. Water conservation inspection results and certificates of compliance 
shall be public information, shall be available for inspection by any interested person during 
regular business hours at the Department, and may be made available electronically via the 
internet. 
1311A.4 Fees. Reasonable fees may be required to pay for, but not exceed, the costs of 
implementing this chapter. Such fees shall be established by the Board of Supervisors upon 
recommendation of the Director of the Department and shall include: 
   1.   The cost of inspections performed by the Department; 
   2.   The cost of the appeal process and the request for exemption process; 
   3.   The cost of filing and processing documents at the Department; 
   4.   The cost of printing forms and informational brochures by the Department; 
   5.   Other expenses incurred by the City and County of San Francisco in implementing this 
Chapter. 
1311A.4.1 Fee schedule. See Building Code Section 110A, Table 1A-N for the applicable fees, 
once established. 
1311A.4.2 Fee review. The Director of the Department of Building Inspection shall cause an 
annual report of fees to be made and filed with the Controller as set forth in Section 3.17-2 of the 
San Francisco Administrative Code. The Controller shall review the report and file it with the 
Board of Supervisors along with a proposed ordinance readjusting the fee rates as necessary. 
SECTION 1312A – APPEALS FROM RESULTS OF A WATER 
CONSERVATION INSPECTION OR REQUEST FOR 
EXEMPTION 
1312A.1 Notice of appeal. Any person with an interest in the property subject to a water 
conservation inspection who contests the determination of a qualified inspector regarding 
required water conservation measures may appeal said decision to the Director within ten 

--- Page 129 ---
127 
working days from the date the completed inspection form was filed with the Department. The 
notice of appeal shall state, clearly and concisely, the grounds upon which the appeal is based. 
The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the water conservation measure 
is not required under this chapter. The determination of the Director may be appealed to the 
Building Inspection Commission pursuant to the appeal procedures established in the 
Administrative Code Chapter 77. 
1312A.2 Exemptions. Any person with an interest in the property subject to a water 
conservation inspection who claims an exemption pursuant to Section 1313A.3 and 1313A.4 of 
this chapter may request a determination of exemption from the Director by filing the request 
and stating the basis for the claim. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate 
the qualifications for the exemption. The determination of the Director may be appealed to the 
Building Inspection Commission pursuant to the appeal procedures established in the 
Administrative Code Chapter 77. Any appeal or request for exemption to the Director pursuant 
to this Section shall be accompanied by payment of a filing fee, pursuant to Section 1216 of the 
San Francisco Housing Code. 
SECTION 1313A – REQUIRED WATER CONSERVATION 
MEASURES 
   The following water conservation measures are required for commercial buildings: 
1313A.1 Showerheads. Replace all showerheads having a maximum flow rate exceeding 2.5 
gallons (9.46 liters) per minute, with showerheads not exceeding the maximum flow rate 
established by the California Energy Commission, as set forth in the Appliance Efficiency 
Regulations, California Code of Regulations, Title 20, Sections 1601 to 1608, as it may be 
amended. Showers shall have no more than one showerhead per valve. For purposes of this 
subsection, the term “showerheads” includes rain heads, rain tiles, or any other fitting that 
transmits water for purposes of showering. 
1313A.2 Faucet aerators. Replace all faucets and faucet aerators having a maximum flow rate 
exceeding 2.2 gallons per minute at a water pressure of 60 pounds per square inch, with 
plumbing fittings not exceeding the maximum flow rate established by the California Energy 
Commission, as set forth in the Appliance Efficiency Regulations, California Code of 
Regulations, Title 20, Sections 1601 to 1608, as it may be amended. Health-care facilities that 
are required by this chapter to install faucet aerators may satisfy that requirement by installing 
other flow restricting devices, such as laminar flow control devices. 
1313A.3 Water closets. Replace all water closets that have a rated water consumption exceeding 
1.6 gallons per flush with fixtures not exceeding the rated maximum water consumption 
established in the San Francisco Plumbing Code Chapter 4 , Section 402.2, as it may be 
amended. An owner of a commercial building may request an exemption from replacing a water 
closet in the building if the replacement would detract from the historical integrity of the 
building, as determined by the Director of the Department of Building Inspection pursuant to the 
California Historic Building Code and Section 1312A.2. 
1313A.4 Urinals. Replace all urinals that have a flow rate exceeding one gallon per flush with 
fixtures not exceeding the maximum flow rate established in the San Francisco Plumbing Code, 
Section 402.3, as it may be amended. An owner of a commercial building may request an 
exemption from replacing a urinal in the building if the replacement would detract from the 
historical integrity of the building, as determined by the Director of the Department of Building 
Inspection pursuant to the California Historical Building Code and Section 1312A.2. 

--- Page 130 ---
128 
1313A.5 Leak repair. All water leaks shall be located and repaired. To determine the existence 
of leaks, the following is required. 
   1.   Visual inspection or water meter registration. If water meter registration is used, 
compliance is achieved if there is no meter movement for ten minutes while all fixtures are shut 
off. 
   2.   All tank type water closets shall be tested with leak detector tablets or dye to detect slow 
valve leaks and all flushometer type fixtures shall be visually checked for proper operation with 
respect to timing and leaks. 
SECTION 1314A – WATER CONSERVATION INSPECTIONS 
1314A.1 Inspections. Inspections to determine compliance with the water conservation 
requirements of this chapter may be conducted by one of the following: 
   1.   An authorized inspector of the Department; 
   2.   A private inspector authorized by the Building Official pursuant to established rules and 
guidelines; 
   3.   A private inspector hired by the Department, or Public Utilities Commission, on a 
contractual basis under terms and fees to be recommended by the Departments and established 
by the Board of Supervisors. 
1314A.2 Qualified inspector duties. The duties of a qualified inspector shall be as follows: 
   1.   To inspect portions of a building that are subject to this chapter to determine whether the 
water conservation standards specified in Section 1313A have been met and, if met, to sign a 
certificate of compliance, pursuant to Section 1311A, and to furnish it to the permit applicant, 
building owner or owner’s agent; 
   2.   To record on an official inspection form, pursuant to Section 1311A, all measures required 
by this chapter for which the building is in noncompliance, and to sign the inspection form and 
furnish it to the permit applicant, building owner or owner’s agent. 
1314A.3 Private water inspectors. Private inspectors shall be required to demonstrate financial 
responsibility by being insured and/or bonded in amounts to be determined by the Building 
Official. 
1314A.4 Conflict of interest. No authorized inspector may conduct a water inspection on any 
building in which that inspector has a financial interest. For the purposes of this section, an 
inspector shall be deemed to have a financial interest in a building if the inspector: 
   1.   Is an owner of the building or the property upon which the building is located in full or in 
part; 
   2.   Is a full- or part-time employee of the building or its owners; 
   3.   Is regularly placed on the building staff by a company that provides building engineering, 
operations and maintenance, or other building services to the property. 
1314A.5 Inspector as employee. No inspector may approve a certificate of water conservation 
compliance for a building where that inspector is an employee or officer of a company that 
performed construction or repair work required by this chapter. 
1314A.6 Limitation. Water conservation inspections are intended to enforce the provisions of 
this chapter only, and are not intended to determine compliance or noncompliance with any other 
portions of this code. 
Add chapter as follows: 
 

--- Page 131 ---
129 
Chapter 13B 
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS 
RECOVERY PROGRAM 
SECTION 1301B – TITLE 
   This chapter shall be known as the “Construction and Demolition Debris Recovery Program.” 
SECTION 1302B – RECOVERY OF CONSTRUCTION AND 
DEMOLITION DEBRIS 
   Under the requirements set forth herein and in Chapter 14 of the Environment Code, all 
construction and demolition debris in amounts of one cubic yard or greater generated in the 
course of a construction or demolition project must be transported off the site by a registered 
transporter, unless transported by the owner of the site, and handled, processed and otherwise 
managed by a registered facility for recovery of the materials. All persons subject to these 
requirements, including an applicant for any building or demolition permit shall comply with the 
requirements for construction and demolition debris recovery set forth in Chapter 14 of the 
Environment Code. 
SECTION 1303B – DEFINITIONS 
   “Construction and demolition debris” shall mean building materials and solid waste generated 
from construction and demolition activities, including, but not limited to, fully-cured asphalt, 
concrete, brick, rock, soil, lumber, gypsum wallboard, cardboard and other associated packaging, 
roofing material, ceramic tile, carpeting, fixtures, plastic pipe, metals, tree stumps, and other 
vegetative matter resulting from land clearing and landscaping for construction, deconstruction, 
demolition or land developments. This term does not include refuse regulated under the 1932 
Refuse Collection and Disposal Initiative Ordinance or sections of the Municipal Code that 
implement the provisions of that ordinance; materials from the public right-of-way; or, unless 
specified in Chapter 14 of the Environment Code, materials source separated for reuse or 
recycling. Hazardous waste, as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 25100 et 
seq., as amended, is not Construction and Demolition Debris for purposes of this Chapter. 
   “Registered Transporter” or “Registered Facility” shall mean a person who holds a valid 
registration issued by the Director of the Department of the Environment pursuant to Chapter 
14 of the Environment Code. “Transporter ” does not include a person that owns and operates 
only vehicles with no more than two axles and no more than two tires per axle. 
SECTION 1304B – PERMIT CONDITION 
   The provisions of Chapter 14 of the Environment Code and any approvals or conditions 
imposed in writing by the Department of the Environment are conditions of the permit issued by 
the Department under Section 106A.1, and a violation of Chapter 14 or such approvals or 
conditions shall be deemed non-compliance with the permit. 
SECTION 1305B – PERMIT NOTIFICATION 
   Permit application materials shall bear notice of and reference to the above requirements and 
the owner’s responsibility for compliance with such requirements. 
Add chapter as follows: 
 

--- Page 132 ---
130 
Chapter 13C 
[RESERVED] 
Note: 
   For Green Building Requirements, see the San Francisco Green Building Code.  
Add chapter as follows: 
 
Chapter 13D 
COMMERCIAL LIGHTING EFFICIENCY 
   The City and County of San Francisco adopts the following Chapter 13D for the purpose of 
reducing public demand for electricity and the associated detriment to the environment of energy 
production and delivery by requiring commercial buildings to install or adopt more energy 
efficient lighting measures. 
SECTION 1301D – TITLE 
   This Chapter shall be known as the “Commercial Lighting Efficiency Ordinance.” 
SECTION 1302D – PURPOSE 
   The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce public demand for electricity and the associated 
detriment to the environment of energy production and delivery by requiring commercial 
buildings to install or adopt more energy efficient lighting measures. 
SECTION 1303D – SCOPE 
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all privately owned non-residential buildings, 
including school facilities, the non-residential portions of mixed-use commercial and residential 
buildings, tourist hotels, and the common areas of residential hotels and multiple-unit residential 
buildings, all as herein defined. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
   The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to: 
   1.   Residential buildings and residential hotels, except that it shall apply to their common 
areas. 
   2.   The residential portions of mixed-use commercial and residential buildings, except that it 
shall apply to their common areas. 
SECTION 1304D – DEFINITIONS 
   For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING is any privately owned building that is occupancy group A, B, E, 
F, H, I, L, M or S as defined in this Code and any tourist hotels, as herein defined. When a 
building is designated for more than one type of occupancy, “Commercial Building” shall mean 
those spaces within the mixed use building designated as A, B, E, F, H, I, L, M or S or tourist 
hotel, as herein defined. Except for tourist hotels as herein defined, “Commercial 
Building” shall include only the common areas of any R (“residential”) occupancy buildings for 
the common areas of any R (“residential”) occupancy portions of mixed use buildings. 
   COMMON AREA is any area, space or room of a building that is made available to the general 
public as either a client or guest. 
   DIRECTOR is the Director of the Department of Building Inspection, or his or her designee. 
   EXIT SIGNS are signs located and illuminated as required by the Building Code. 

--- Page 133 ---
131 
   LINEAR FLUORESCENT LAMP is a “tube” or “bulb” formed in a straight shape, as 
distinguished from a circular or u-shape, but not including linear specialty lamps such as black 
lights. 
   LUMINAIRE is an interior or exterior complete lighting unit, including internally or externally 
illuminated signs, consisting of the lamp and the parts designed to distribute the light, to protect 
the lamp, and to connect the lamp to the power supply, but not including illuminated utilization 
equipment or exit signs as defined herein. 
   OCCUPANCY SENSOR CONTROL DEVICE is a device that automatically turns off a 
luminaires or series of luminaires not more than 30 minutes after it senses that the area is 
vacated. 
   TOURIST HOTEL is any residential building, or portion thereof, which is occupied as a hotel, 
motel or inn and which has a certificate of use for tourist occupancy, or any portion of a 
residential building which is converted to tourist hotel use pursuant to the Residential Hotel 
Conversion Ordinance (S.F. Administrative Code, Article 41) or other City law. 
   UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT is commercial, retail or industrial equipment, including but not 
limited to refrigeration equipment, fully enclosed retail display cases, vending machines, printing 
equipment or conveyors, which uses 4-foot or 8-foot linear fluorescent lamps as an integrated 
part of such equipment. “Utilization Equipment” shall not include furniture or workstations. 
SECTION 1305D – COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS 
1305D.1 Compliance Deadline. No later than December 31, 2011 (“Compliance Deadline”), the 
owner of each building subject to this Chapter shall self-certify that the entire building meets the 
standards specified in this Chapter 13D, and if the building is not certified, the building owner 
shall make such repairs as may be required to conform to this Chapter. 
1305D.2 Stay of compliance deadline. The Compliance Deadline stated in Section 1305D.1 
shall be stayed for up to two years from the date of an application for a demolition permit for any 
building subject to this Chapter. If the building is demolished and a Certificate of Completion 
issued by the Department before the end of the two-year postponement, the requirements of this 
Chapter shall not apply. If the building is not demolished after the expiration of two year, the 
provisions of this Chapter 13D shall apply even though the demolition permit is still in effect or 
a new demolition permit has been issued. 
SECTION 1306D – LIGHTING EFFICIENCY MEASURES 
1306D.1. Mercury Content. The mercury content of each 4-foot linear fluorescent lamp 
installed after the Compliance Deadline in a luminaires in a building subject to this Chapter shall 
not exceed 5 mg. The mercury content of each 8-foot linear fluorescent lamp installed after the 
Compliance Deadline in a luminaires in a building subject to this Chapter shall not exceed 10 
mg. 
1306D.2. Energy efficiency. The lamp and ballast system in each luminaire that utilizes one or 
more 4-foot or 8-foot linear fluorescent lamp to provide illumination in a building subject to 
this Chapter 13D must meet at least one of the following requirements: 
   1.   The lamp and ballast system emits 81 or more lumens per watt of electricity consumed. 
   2.   The luminaire is controlled by an occupancy sensor control device that does not control an 
area in the building of more than 250 square feet. 
   3.   The luminaire is fitted with a lighting efficiency measure approved by the Director as 
equivalent to the measures in subsection (1) or (2). 
   4.   The Director finds, based on the facts of the particular building and luminaire, that the 
energy savings from installing lighting efficiency measures meeting the requirements of this 

--- Page 134 ---
132 
Section will be so insignificant over the life of the luminaire that the measure is not cost 
efficient. 
   5.   If the owner of a Commercial Building elects to meet the requirements of this 
Section 1306D.2 with measures that require permits, such permits shall comply with all other 
applicable requirements of this Code and all other applicable state and local laws. 
SECTION 1307D – ENFORCEMENT 
   Any building maintained in violation of this Chapter shall constitute a public nuisance under 
the terms of Section 102A of this Code and such nuisance may be abated pursuant to the 
procedures set forth in Section 102A of this code for unsafe buildings. 
SECTION 1308D – RULES 
   The director, after consulting with the Department of the Environment, and in accordance with 
Section 104A.2.1 of this Code, shall adopt, and may amend, reasonable rules, guidelines and 
forms for implementing the provisions and intent of this Chapter. 
SECTION 1309D – UNDERTAKING FOR THE GENERAL 
WELFARE 
   In undertaking the enforcement of this Chapter, the City and County of San Francisco is 
assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it 
imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money 
damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. 
SECTION 1310D – PREEMPTION 
   Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in 
conflict with any federal or state law or regulation. 
SECTION 1311D – SEVERABILITY 
   If any provision or clause of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person or 
circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise invalid by any court of competent 
jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions, and clauses of this Chapter are 
declared to be severable. 
 
Chapter 14 
EXTERIOR WALLS 
SECTION 1402 – PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 
1402 Add a section as follows: 
1402.8 1402.11 Projections and appendages. Provisions shall be made at the outer edge of all 
projections and appendages to control rainwater backflow under the projection. Ventilation shall 
be provided for all enclosed spaces of exposed soffits, bays and other projections in wood framed 
construction. 
   Where an uncovered balcony or deck with an impervious surface exceeds 200 square feet 
(18.58 m2) in area, drainage shall be conveyed directly to a building drain or building sewer or 
be conveyed to an approved alternate location based on approved geotechnical and engineering 
design. 
 

--- Page 135 ---
133 
Chapter 15 
ROOF ASSEMBLIES AND ROOFTOP 
STRUCTURES 
SECTION 1501 – GENERAL 
1501.1 Add a second paragraph as follows: 
   For qualified historical buildings or properties, see 2022 2025 California Historical Building 
Code. 
SECTION 1502 – ROOF DRAINAGE 
1502.1 Add a second paragraph as follows: 
   All storm- or casual water from roof areas which total more than 200 square feet (18.58 m2) 
shall drain or be conveyed directly to the building drain or storm drain or to an approved 
alternate location based on approved geotechnical and engineering design. Such drainage shall 
not be directed to flow onto adjacent property or over public sidewalks. Building projections not 
exceeding 12 inches (305 mm) in width are exempt from drainage requirements without area 
limitations. 
SECTION 1505 – FIRE CLASSIFICATION 
1505.1 Add the following at the end of the first paragraph: 
Class B or better roof coverings shall be used on all buildings. 
1505.1 Add the following second exception: 
   2.   Detached accessory structures with a roof of less than 200 square feet (18.58 m2) may have 
roof coverings of Class A, B or C. 
Table 1505.1 Revise the table as follows: 
TABLE 1505.1 – MINIMUM ROOF COVERING CLASSIFICATION FOR TYPES OF 
CONSTRUCTION 
  
IA IB IIA IIB IIIA IIIB IV VA VB 
B B B  [ ← ] B B  [ ← ] B B B  [ ← ] B 
  
SECTION 1507 – REQUIREMENTS FOR ROOF COVERINGS 
1507.8.5 Add the following sentence at the end of the paragraph: 
Untreated wood shingles shall not be permitted. 
1507.9.6 Add the following sentence at the end of the paragraph: 
Untreated wood shakes shall not be permitted. 
SECTION 1511 –ROOFTOP STRUCTURES 
1511.2.2 Add the following sentence at the end of this section: 
Penthouses shall be of a size no larger than the minimum clearances required for the mechanical 
equipment to be installed or no larger than the vertical shaft opening in the roof. 
1511 Add the following section: 
1511.10 1511.11 Occupied roof decks. Occupiable roof decks may be constructed of wood 
when the following conditions are met: 
   1.   The occupied roof deck is less than 500 square feet (46.45 m2) in area. 
   2.   The deck boards are spaced not greater than 1/8 inch (3.2 mm) apart. 
   3.   Any open space around the perimeter between the deck and the roof surface shall be 
enclosed to within 1 inch (25.4 mm) of the roof surface. 

--- Page 136 ---
134 
   4.   The decking is constructed of fire-retardant- treated wood approved for exterior use, or 2-
inch (50.8 mm) nominal all heart redwood. Guardrails and fences may be constructed of any 
material permitted by this code. 
   5.   The deck is installed on top of a Class A or B fire-resistive roof assembly. The deck shall 
not be considered part of such roof assembly. 
 
Chapter 16 
STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
SECTION 1604 – GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
1604 Add the following section: 
1604.11 Earthquake Recording Instrumentation. The City and County of San Francisco 
adopts Appendix L. 
SECTION 1607 – LIVE LOADS 
1607.20 1607.19 Revise this section as follows: 
1607.19 Sidewalks, vehicular driveways, and yards subject to trucking or vehicle 
loading.  The live loading indicated in Table 1607.1 for sidewalks, vehicular driveways, and 
yards subject to trucking or vehicle loading shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
 
1607.20 1607.19 Add the following section: 
1607.20.3 1607.19.3 Driveways and sidewalks subject to vehicle loading. Driveways subject 
to vehicle loading shall be designed in accordance with the American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) HS-20 Standard Specification for Highways 
and Bridges. Sidewalks subject to vehicle loading shall be designed for a concentrated load of 
10,000 pounds placed upon any space 2½ feet (762 mm) square, wherever this load upon an 
otherwise unloaded sidewalk would produce stresses greater than those caused by the uniform 
load of 250 psf required therefor. 
 
Chapter 16A 
STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 17 
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS 
SECTION 1704 – SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS, 
CONTRACTOR RESPONSIBILITY AND STRUCTURAL 
OBSERVATION 
1704.2 Replace Exception 2 as follows: 
   2.  [ ← ]    The special inspections and verifications for foundation concrete, other than cast-in-
place drilled piles or caissons, are not required for occupancies in Group R-3 and occupancies in 
Group U that are accessory to a residential occupancy, but not limited to, those listed in Section 
312.1. 

--- Page 137 ---
135 
      This exception shall not apply to foundations serving as retaining walls of soil over 5 feet 
(1829 mm) in height measured from the base of the foundation, or the structural design of the 
footing based on a specified compressive strength, f’c, greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch 
(psi) (17.2 MPa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents 
or used in the footing construction. 
SECTION 1705 – REQUIRED SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND 
TESTS 
1705.1.1 Add item 4 as follows: 
   4.   Work which, in the opinion of the Director, involves unusual hazards or conditions such as 
underpinning, shoring, removal of hazardous materials and new construction methods not 
covered by this code. 
1705.4 Add the following section: 
1705.4.3 Retrofit of unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings. Special inspection is 
required: 
   1   During the testing of mortar quality and performance of masonry shear tests. 
   2   During repointing operations. 
   3   During the installation of new shear bolts. 
   4   Prior to the placement of the bolt and grout or adhesive for embedded bolts. 
   5   During the prequalification tests. 
1705.5 Add the following section: 
1705.5.8 Shear walls and floor systems used as shear diaphragms. Special inspection is 
required for all connections, including nailing, tie-downs, framing clips, bolts and straps, as part 
of the lateral force resisting system utilizing the following components: 
   1   Plywood diaphragms, where shear values exceed 2/3 the values in Table 2306.3(1). 
   2   Double sheathed shear walls, in all cases. 
   3   Plywood shear walls, wherever nailing or hardware are not visible to the district inspector at 
the time of cover-up inspection. 
      If nailing is not visible to the inspector at the called inspection, or if the special inspector has 
not inspected the work prior to the concealment, all work concealing such nailing shall be 
removed in order to permit a complete inspection. 
   4   Gypsum wallboard shearwalls where shear values exceed one-half of the values in Table 
2306.3(3). 
   5   Fiberboard shearwalls where shear values exceed one-half of the values in Table 2306.3(2). 
1705.13.5 Revise this section as follows: 
1705.13.5 Architectural components. Periodic special inspection is required for the erection 
and fastening of exterior cladding, interior and exterior nonbearing walls, interior and exterior 
veneer, appendages, and ornamentation in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E 
or F. 
Exception: Periodic special inspection is not required for the following: 
   1.   Exterior cladding, interior and exterior nonbearing walls and interior and exterior 
veneer weighing 15 psf (0.72 kN/m2) or less and located less than 10 feet (3048 mm) above 
grade or walking surface. 
   2.   Exterior cladding and interior and exterior veneer weighing 5psf (0.24 kN/m2) or less and 
located less than 15 feet (4572 mm) above grade. 
   3.   Interior nonbearing walls weighing 15 psf (0.72 kN/m2) or less. 
1705 Add the following section: 

--- Page 138 ---
136 
1705.21 Demolition. For demolition of buildings more than two stories or 25 feet (7.62 m) in 
height, see Section 3303 for demolition requirements. 
   EXCEPTION: Type V buildings. 
1705.22 Construction subject to the Slope Protection Act, created by Section 106A.4.1.4; or 
construction of a new building or structure, or alterations that involve a substantial increase in 
the envelope of an existing building or structure within the Edgehill Mountain Slope Protection 
Area, created by Building Code Section 106A.4.1.2, or the Northwest Mt. Sutro Slope Protection 
Area, created by Building Code Section 106A.4.1.3; provided, however, that, until the special 
inspection reports required by Building Code Section 1704.2.4 are submitted to and approved by 
the Department, the phase of construction subsequent to the phase or element for which the 
report was completed cannot commence. 
1705.23 Crane Safety. No owner or other person shall operate, authorize or permit the operation 
of a tower crane on a high-rise building structure until a signed Crane Site Safety Plan, Submittal 
Form and Crane Safety Compliance Agreement have been accepted by the Building Official. 
 
Chapter 17A 
SPECIAL INSPECTIONS AND TESTS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 18 
SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 18A 
SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 19 
CONCRETE 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 19A 
CONCRETE 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 20 
ALUMINUM 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 

--- Page 139 ---
137 
 
Chapter 21 
MASONRY 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 21A 
MASONRY 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 22 
STEEL 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 22A 
STEEL 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 23 
WOOD 
SECTION 2304 – GENERAL CONSTRUCTION 
REQUIREMENTS 
2304.12.1.5 Add the following second paragraph: 
   Walls not accessible for maintenance shall have exterior covering of siding or plywood that are 
either treated wood or wood of natural resistance to decay. Plywood shall be exterior type, C-C 
Grade minimum, and not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) thickness unless applied over sheathing. 
Plywood manufactured with redwood or cedar faces but with inner plys of other species 
conforming to DOC Standard PS1-95 may be used, provided the exposed outer face is plugged 
and not grooved or patterned. 
2304.12.2.3 Add the following 2nd paragraph with exception, and 3rd paragraph:  
   Weather-exposed stairways constructed with concrete, masonry, brick, tile or terrazzo shall be 
supported on hot-dipped galvanized steel or reinforced concrete stringers. 
   EXCEPTION: In Group R, Division 3 Occupancies, wood construction on masonry or 
concrete foundations may be used as supports, and the area under the stair shall be ventilated in 
compliance with 2304.12.4. 
   Weather-exposed stairs of precast concrete or metal pan treads may be supported on wood 
stringers, provided the entire stairway is exposed and the treads are connected to the stringers by 
hot-dipped galvanized steel or other approved corrosion-resistant fasteners. 
2304.12.2.6 Add the following section: 
2304.12.2.6.2 Wood structural members. Wood structural members that support moisture 
permeable floors or roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry slabs, 

--- Page 140 ---
138 
shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood unless separated from such floors or 
roofs by an impervious moisture barrier extending up the walls not less than 4 inches (101.6 mm) 
or shall otherwise be adequately flashed and counter flashed. 
   Regardless of finish flooring type or structural materials, the wood sub-floor of toilet rooms 
and bathrooms shall be protected by a waterproof membrane. Where a single ply sheet 
membrane is used, all adhesives shall be of a waterproof type and shall be applied so as to form a 
full unbroken coat between the backing and the membrane being applied. All seams and joints 
shall be thoroughly sealed. 
   Exception: Interior floors in Group R, Division 3 Occupancies. 
 
Chapter 24 
GLASS AND GLAZING 
SECTION 2405 – SLOPED GLAZING AND SKYLIGHTS 
2405.3 Revise this exception as follows: 
   3.   Any glazing material, including annealed glass, is permitted to be installed without screens 
in the sloped glazing systems of commercial or detached noncombustible greenhouses used 
exclusively for growing plants and not open to the public, provided that the height of the 
greenhouse at the ridge does not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) above grade except that for R-3 
occupancies and townhouses, the greenhouse height at the ridge does not exceed 20 feet (6096 
mm) above grade. [CRC R308.6.6 R324.6.6] 
 
Chapter 25 
GYPSUM BOARD, GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS 
AND PLASTER 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 26 
PLASTIC 
SECTION 2603 – FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION 
2603.3 Revise the first sentence of Exception 3 as follows: 
   3.   Foam plastic insulation that is part of a Class A  [ ← ]  or B  [ ← ], roof-covering assembly 
provided  [ ← ] the assembly with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes NFPA 276 or 
UL 1256. 
2603.4.1.5 Revise this section as follows: 
2603.4.1.5 Roofing. A thermal barrier is not required for foam plastic insulation that is part of a 
Class A, B, or C roof covering assembly that is installed in accordance with the code and the 
manufacturer’s instructions and is either constructed as described in item 1 or tested as described 
in Item 2. 
   1.   The roof assembly is separated from the interior of the building by wood structural panel 
sheathing not less than 0.47 inch (11.9 mm) in thickness bonded with exterior glue, and 
identified as Exposure 1 with edges supported by blocking, tongue-and-groove joints, other 
approved type of edge support or an equivalent material. 

--- Page 141 ---
139 
   The assembly with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes NFPA 276 or UL1256. 
2603.6 Revise this section as follows: 
2603.6 Roofing. Foam plastic insulation meeting the requirements of Sections 2603.2, 2603.3 
and 2603.4 shall be permitted as a part of a roof-covering assembly, provided [ ← ] the assembly 
with the foam plastic insulation is a Class A [ ← ] or B [ ← ], roofing assembly where tested in 
accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790. 
 
Chapter 27 
ELECTRICAL 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 28 
MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 29 
PLUMBING SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments Refer to San Francisco Plumbing Code 
 
Chapter 30 
ELEVATORS AND CONVEYING SYSTEMS 
3010 Add the following section: 
SECTION 3010 – PRIVATE RESIDENCE ELEVATORS 
3010.1  PRIVATE RESIDENCE TYPE ELEVATOR is a power passenger elevator which is 
limited in size, capacity, rise and speed and is installed in a private residence or in a multiple 
dwelling as a means of access to a private residence. 
3010.2 Construction. The construction and installation of private residence elevators, 
dumbwaiters, and private residence special access lifts shall comply with ANSI/ASME 17.1 
2019. 
[ Note: For other than private residence elevators, dumbwaiters, and private residence special 
access lifts, see Title 8, California Code of Regulations, California Elevator Safety Regulations.] 
 
 No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
 
Chapter 31 
SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION 
SECTION 3103 – TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 
3103.1.23 Add this sentence to the end of the paragraph. 
See Section 106A.1.7 for permit requirements. 

--- Page 142 ---
140 
SECTION 3107 – SIGNS 
Replace this section with the following sections: 
3107.1 General. [ ← ] Except as otherwise provided herein, all signs placed upon or attached to 
any building, structure or property shall comply with this chapter and shall be installed under a 
valid sign permit. 
   The electrical portion of the sign shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of 
the Electrical Code, and an electrical permit shall be obtained in accordance with that code. 
   Plans shall be filed with the application for a permit for any sign. When required, computations 
shall be provided. 
3107.1.1 Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this code: 
   1.   Signs painted on structures. However, such signs must comply with the San Francisco 
Planning Code, and an application shall be filed with the Department. 
   2.   Bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions, when such boards are located 
on the premises of said institutions. 
   3.   Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are 
maintained, which do not exceed 15 square feet (1.39 m2) in size, and which are mounted flush 
to the building. 
   4.   Professional occupation signs denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a 
commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling house, and not exceeding 3 square 
feet (0.278 m2) in area for each occupant. 
3107.1.2 Prohibitions. The following prohibitions apply to signs: 
   1.   No signs shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to block any exits or required 
windows. No sign shall be attached to a standpipe, gutter drain, stairway or fire escape, or 
interfere with the function or operation of any standpipe or fire escape. No roof sign shall be 
located within 6 feet (1.829 m) of a standpipe outlet. 
   2.   No sign shall be increased in size, altered in shape or changed by the addition of other signs 
or advertising matter not specifically allowed by the provisions of this code and the San 
Francisco Planning Code. 
   3.   No wall sign shall extend across or in front of any window or other exterior opening 
located above the first story of a building, except as approved by the Building Official. 
   4.   No wall sign erected on a wall adjacent to and facing a street, public space or yard shall 
project above the parapet walls. 
   EXCEPTIONS: 
   1.   On a building located on a corner lot, a wall sign may project a maximum of 7 feet (2.134 
m) above the roof line on only one street. 
   2.   On any frontage, signs not more than 10 feet (3.048 m) long for any 40-foot (12.19 m) 
frontage and occupying no more than 25 percent of the lot frontage may project a maximum of 7 
feet (2.134 m) above the roof line. 
3107.1.3 Permit number on sign. Every sign shall have the permit number clearly painted and 
maintained on its face or edge, and of such size and location as to be legible from the sidewalk 
level, ground level or an easily accessible location. Electric signs may have an approved metal 
tag attached to them instead of painted characters. 
3107.1.4 Revocable permits. The permit for any sign over public property may be revoked. A 
permit granted under Chapter 1A and this chapter for a sign over public property shall not be 
construed to create any perpetual right but is a revocable license which may be terminated by 
revocation by the Board of Supervisors. 

--- Page 143 ---
141 
3107.1.5 Existing signs. This chapter shall not render unlawful the existence or maintenance of 
any sign erected or maintained by a lawful permit issued prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
   EXCEPTION: Signs for which lawful permits were issued and which, due to a sidewalk 
narrowing or street widening project, no longer conform to the requirements of Section 3107.3 
shall be altered to conform not later than 90 days following completion of such project. 
3107.2 Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
   APPROVED PLASTIC is a plastic material found to be suitable functionally for the purpose 
for which it is intended and which complies with the requirements of Chapter 26. For outdoor 
signs, the approval of the plastic shall be based upon considerations of flame spread value only. 
For indoor signs, the approval shall be based upon flame spread and smoke density values. 
   AREA OF A SIGN is that area of exposed vertical surface which is included within a rectangle 
enclosing all the features of the sign. In cases of an irregular sign, it is the sum of the areas of the 
enclosing rectangles estimated to the nearest 5 square feet (0.465 m2). 
   BUSINESS SIGN is a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry 
or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is 
located, or to which it is affixed. 
   SIGN is any structure, part thereof, or device or inscription which is located upon, attached to 
or painted, projected or represented on the exterior of any building or structure, including an 
awning, canopy, marquee or similar appendage, or affixed to the glass on the outside or inside of 
a window so as to be seen from the outside of the building, and which displays or includes any 
numeral, letter, word, model, banner, emblem, insignia, symbol, device, light, trademark or other 
representation used as, or in the nature of, an announcement, advertisement or designation by or 
of any person, firm, group, organization, place, commodity, product, service, business, 
profession, enterprise or industry. A sign includes the support, uprights and framework of the 
display. 
3107.3 Height, projection, and location. 
   Height, projection and location of all signs shall be as specified in Article 6 of the San 
Francisco Planning Code. No sign shall project past the curbline of any street, alley or public 
way. 
   The minimum vertical clearance of signs over public sidewalks shall be 10 feet (3.048 m). 
Additionally, signs or portions within the outer one- third of a sidewalk shall have 12-foot (3.658 
m) clearance, and when within 2 feet (0.61 m) of the curbline shall have 14-foot (4.267 m) 
clearance. 
   Roof signs shall be not less than 5 feet (1.524 m) above the roof. Supports shall be spaced at 
least 6 feet (1.829 m) apart. 
3107.4 Design. 
   The design shall make allowances for the effects of corrosion and lack of maintenance. 
   No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or suspended by, an unbraced parapet 
wall, unless such wall is designed in accordance with the requirements for parapet walls 
specified in Chapter 16. 
   Fasteners and braces shall be of noncombustible construction, except that stringers for 
attachment of roof signs may be of 6-inch (152.4 mm) minimum dimension redwood or 
approved preservative-treated lumber. 
3107.5 Construction. 
3107.5.1 General. All signs shall be constructed of noncombustible materials except that 
approved plastics may be used in sign facings as described in Section 3107.5.2. All ferrous metal 

--- Page 144 ---
142 
and all fastenings used in construction or installation, excluding stainless steel, shall be hot-
dipped galvanized, porcelain-enameled or otherwise protected in an approved manner against 
corrosion. 
   Aluminum may only be used for minor internal members, such as stiffeners and closures, and 
for sign faces and nonstructural trim. The minimum thickness shall be 0.0299 inch (0.76 mm). 
   Steel shapes or plates used for primary support shall be not less than 3/16 inch (4.76 mm) in 
thickness. Sheet metal formed integrally with the sign face or used as cabinet cover shall be not 
less than 0.0239 inch (24 gauge). Secondary support members not formed integrally with the 
design face shall be not less than 0.1046 (12 gauge) inch. 
   The minimum material thickness requirements in this section pertain to the base metal before 
application of protective covering and need not apply to signs located inside a building. 
3107.5.2 Plastics. Where plastics are included in a sign, the application to install a sign shall set 
forth the manufacturer’s trade name, or the common name of the plastic material to be used in 
the sign, thickness of plastic, aspect ratio, corrugation type, if any, and span. The plastic 
employed in the signs shall be identified as set forth in Chapter 26 with the manufacturer’s trade 
name, or with the common name of the plastic material. 
   Plastic sign facing shall conform to the provisions of this section. Plastic sign faces, formed or 
flat, letters and decorations shall be of sufficient thickness or so formed or supported that they 
will withstand all loads required by this code. 
   Plastic facing shall be mounted in a metal frame. Proper provision shall be made for the 
difference in thermal expansion between plastic members and the frame. 
3107.5.3 Electric plastic signs. Every electric sign containing approved plastics shall comply 
with the minimum requirements set forth in the Standard for Electric Signs, UL No. 48. The 
attachment of Underwriters Laboratories label, or other approved laboratory per the Electrical 
Code, shall be sufficient proof that a sign has complied with the requirements of the Electrical 
Code. 
3107.5.4 Wood-faced signs. Projecting signs with wood facing or backing are permitted on any 
building. 
   Plywood used for signs shall be exterior grade and not less than 5/8-inch (15.88 mm) thickness. 
Lumber shall be not less than 1-inch (25.4 mm) nominal and shall be finished to provide a 
weather- resistant finish. 
3107.6 Ground signs. 
3107.6.1 Height. The maximum height of a ground sign constructed with wood supports shall be 
30 feet (9.14 m), as measured from the top of the sign to the sidewalk in front of the sign or the 
existing ground under the sign, whichever is higher. 
3107.6.2 Design and construction. The design and construction of wood signs shall comply 
with Chapters 16 and 23 of this code. All wood within 12 inches of the ground shall be pressure-
treated wood. 
3107.7 Removal of business signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any business 
sign to remain posted more than 180 days after the activity for which the business sign has been 
posted has ceased operation on the premises if such person (1) owns, leases or rents the property 
on which the sign is posted, or (2) owns or operates such business, service, industry or other 
activity. 
SECTION 3116 – WOODBURNING APPLIANCES 
3116 Add a section as follows 

--- Page 145 ---
143 
3116.1 Woodburning appliances. All woodburning appliances installed in new buildings or 
woodburning appliances being added, reconstructed or replaced in existing buildings shall 
comply with this section. 
   Gas fireplaces shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. However, the conversion 
of a gas fireplace to burn wood shall constitute the installation of a woodburning appliance and 
shall be subject to the requirements of this section. 
3116.2 Definitions. The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and 
interpretation of this section. 
   BAY AREA AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT means the air quality agency for 
the San Francisco Bay Area established pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 
40200. 
   EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
   EPA CERTIFIED WOOD HEATER means any wood heater that meets the standards in Title 
40, Part 60, Subpart AAA, Code of Federal Regulations in effect at the time of installation and is 
certified and labeled pursuant to those regulations. 
   FIREPLACE means any permanently installed masonry or factory-built appliance that burns 
wood, except a pellet-fueled wood heater, designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater 
than or equal to 35 to one. 
   GARBAGE means all solid, semisolid and liquid wastes generated from residential, 
commercial and industrial sources, including trash, refuse, rubbish, industrial wastes, asphaltic 
products, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and 
semisolid wastes. 
   GAS FIREPLACE means any device designed to burn natural gas in a manner that simulates 
the appearance of a woodburning fireplace. 
   PAINTS means all exterior and interior house and trim paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers, 
stains, primers, sealers, undercoatings, roof coatings, wood preservatives, shellacs, and other 
paints or paint-like products. 
   PAINT SOLVENTS means all original solvents sold or used to thin paints or to clean up 
painting equipment. 
   PELLET-FUELED WOOD HEATER means any appliance that burns wood and operates 
exclusively on wood pellets. 
   RECONSTRUCTION means the complete rebuilding of the woodburning appliance such that 
all or a substantial portion of its parts are new. It does not include repairs made to the appliance 
in order to make it safer or more efficient. 
   SOLID FUEL means wood or any other nongaseous or nonliquid fuel. 
   TREATED WOOD means wood of any species that has been chemically impregnated, painted 
or similarly modified to improve resistance to insects or weathering. It does not include products 
such as Duraflame or Presto logs that are specifically designed and sold to be burned in a 
woodburning appliance. 
   WASTE PETROLEUM PRODUCTS means any petroleum product other than gaseous fuels 
that has been refined from crude oil and has been used, and as a result of use has been 
contaminated with physical or chemical impurities. 
   WOODBURNING APPLIANCE means fireplace, wood heater, or pellet-fueled wood heater 
or any similar device burning any solid fuel used for aesthetic or space-heating purposes. 
   WOOD HEATER means a stove that burns wood. 

--- Page 146 ---
144 
3116.3 Unauthorized appliances prohibited. No person shall install a woodburning appliance 
that is not one of the following: 
   1.   A pellet-fueled wood heater; 
   2.   An EPA-certified wood heater; or 
   3.   A fireplace certified by the Northern Sonoma Air Pollution Control District. 
   Exceptions: 
      1.   Woodburning appliances that are designed primarily for food preparation in new or 
existing restaurants or bakeries. 
      2.   Historic woodburning appliances installed in historic structures, as determined by the 
Building Official of the Department of Building Inspection in consultation with the Director of 
the Department of Planning. 
3116.4 Prohibited fuels. The following fuels are prohibited from use in a woodburning 
appliance: 
   1.   Garbage; 
   2.   Treated wood; 
   3.   Plastic products; 
   4.   Rubber products; 
   5.   Waste petroleum products; 
   6.   Paints or paint solvents; 
   7.   Coal; 
   8.   Glossy or colored paper; 
   9.   Particle board; or 
   10.   Saltwater driftwood. 
3116.5 Certification. Any person who plans to install a woodburning appliance must submit 
documentation to the Building Official demonstrating that the appliance is a pellet-fueled wood 
heater, a certified wood heater, or a fireplace certified by Northern Sonoma Air Pollution Control 
District. 
   NOTE: Ordinance 13-02, adopted 1-14-2002, which amended Section 3102.8, contained the 
following findings: 
   (a)   In 1982, the State Air Resources Board (ARB) adopted a particulate matter (PM10) 
Ambient Air Quality Standard (AAQS). Levels for the PM10 AAQS were selected pursuant to 
California Code of Regulations Title 17 Section 70200 to protect the health of people who are 
sensitive to exposure to fine particles. 
   (b)   Research indicates that wood smoke is a significant contributor to PM10 levels that pose 
significant health risks. 
   (c)   The City and County of San Francisco desires to lessen the risk to life and property from 
air pollution from woodburning appliances. 
   (d)   The City and County of San Francisco finds that the proposed regulation will significantly 
reduce the increases in particulate emissions from future installation and construction activities. 
   (e)   The City and County of San Francisco finds a need exists to adopt regulations which apply 
to woodburning combustion emissions. 
 

--- Page 147 ---
145 
Chapter 31A 
SYSTEMS FOR WINDOW CLEANING OR 
EXTERIOR BUILDING MAINTENANCE 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 31B [DPH] 
PUBLIC POOLS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 31C [DPH] 
RADIATION 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 31D [DPH] 
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 31E 
RESERVED 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 31F [SLC] 
MARINE OIL TERMINALS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Chapter 32 
ENCROACHMENTS INTO PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-
WAY 
SECTION 3201 – GENERAL 
3201.4 Revise this section as follows: 
3201.4 Drainage. Drainage water collected from a roof, awning, canopy or marquee, and 
condensate from mechanical equipment shall be conducted to the building drain or building 
sewer, and shall not flow over a public walking surface. 
SECTION 3202 – ENCROACHMENTS 
3202.3.1 Replace this section as follows: 

--- Page 148 ---
146 
3202.3.1 Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs. Awnings, canopies, marquees and signs 
shall be constructed so as to support applicable loads as specified in Chapter 16. [ ← ] Canopies 
shall be allowed only over entrance doorways and only for Occupancy Groups A, B, F-1, M, S-1, 
S-2 and R. Canopies may be constructed as awnings and with the same limitations except that: 
   1.   The maximum width shall be 10 feet (3.048 m); and 
   2.   The maximum extension over public sidewalk may be to a point 2 feet (0.61 m) from the 
curb; and 
   3.   The outer column support shall be located in the outer one-third of the sidewalk. 
3202.3.2 Replace this section as follows: 
3202.3.2 Windows, balconies, architectural features and mechanical equipment. [ ← ]  
   A 3-foot (0.914 m) projection shall be permitted for bay and oriel windows when the clearance 
above grade is at least 10 feet (3.048 m) and the width of the sidewalk is greater than 9 feet (2.74 
m). Where the sidewalk width is 9 feet (2.74 m) or less, the projection shall not exceed 2 feet 
(0.61 m). 
   For all other appendages, a 2-foot (0.61 m) projection is permitted when the clearance above 
grade is at least 10 feet (3.048 m). The projection may be increased 1 inch (25.4 mm) for each 
additional foot of clearance over 10 feet (3.048 m), to a maximum of 4 feet (1.219 m). 
3202.3.4 Add the following after the first paragraph as follows: 
   A covered pedestrian walkway may be constructed over a street between buildings of only 
Types I-A and I-B construction. Permission from the Board of Supervisors and approval of the 
Department of Public Works and Planning Commission is required. The pedestrian walk-way 
shall comply with the following conditions: 
   1.   The pedestrian walkway shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. The 
supporting structure shall be three-hour fire-resistive construction. Columns located within 8 feet 
(2.438 m) of the curb, or otherwise vulnerable to vehicle impact, shall either be designed for 
such impact or protected from the impact. 
   2.   The openings in the exterior walls of the buildings at the ends of the pedestrian walkway 
shall be protected by 1½ hour fire assemblies. 
SECTION 3203 – SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
3203 Add a section as follows: 
3203.1 General. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Public Works Code. 
   Sidewalks over excavated areas shall be supported on noncombustible construction with 3-hour 
fire-rated protection. The sidewalk shall be waterproofed by use of a hot mopped asphalt 
membrane or other approved means. 
3203.2 Openings in Sidewalks. 
3203.2.1 Sidewalk trapdoor. Every basement extending under the sidewalk shall have an 
approved sidewalk trapdoor. The minimum size of the trapdoor opening shall be 4 feet by 4 feet 
(1.219 m by 1.219 m). However, trapdoors shall not be required where the basement is provided 
with an automatic sprinkler system. 
3203.2.2 Sidewalk elevators. All openings hereafter constructed in sidewalks for sidewalk 
elevators shall be located in the outer half of the sidewalks, next to the curb. The outer edges of 
the openings shall be not more than 30 inches (762 mm) from the outer line of the curb. The 
length of the sides of the openings at right angles to the curb shall not exceed one-half of the 
width of the sidewalk and in no case shall it exceed 5 feet (1.524 m). 
3203.2.3 Any other purpose. Openings on the sidewalks for any other purpose, if placed outside 
the property line, shall be covered with approved gratings having a maximum opening between 
bars of ½ inch (12.7 mm), or with covers having a rough surface, and rabbeted flush with the 

--- Page 149 ---
147 
sidewalk. When a cover is placed in any sidewalk, it shall be placed as near as practicable to the 
line of the curb. All spaces under sidewalks shall be thoroughly ventilated. 
3203.2.4 Framing. All framing supporting only the sidewalk opening shall be of 
noncombustible material. 
3203.2.5 Guards. Metal guards will be required for openings in sidewalks in accordance with 
the Police Code. 
3203.3 Electrical Transformers. No portion of any electrical transformer pad shall be 
constructed, nor electrical transformer installed on the surface of any portion of any public 
sidewalk. 
 
Chapter 33 
SAFEGUARDS DURING CONSTRUCTION 
SECTION  
3301 -  GENERAL 
3302 3301 Add a section as follows: 
3302.4 3301.6 Fencing. Provide for the enclosing, fencing, and boarding up or by fire watch or 
other means of preventing access to the site by unauthorized persons when work is not in 
progress. 
SECTION 3303 – DEMOLITION 
3303.1 Add sections as follows: 
3303.1.1 Buildings other than Type V. The demolition of structures of Types I, II, III and IV 
construction greater than two stories or 25 feet (7.62 m) in height shall comply with the 
requirements of this section. 
   The requirements of this section shall also apply to the demolition of post-tensioned and pre-
tensioned concrete structures. 
3303.1.2 Required plans. Prior to approval of an application for a demolition permit, two sets of 
detailed plans shall be submitted for approval, showing the following: 
   1.   The sequence of operation floor by floor, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed 
architect. 
   2.   The location of standpipes. 
   3.   The location and details of protective canopies. 
   4.   The location of truck crane during operation. 
   5.   Any necessary fence or barricade with lights. 
   6.   Any floor or wall left standing. 
   7.   The schedule of the days when the demolition will be done, i.e., on weekdays or on 
Sundays. 
3303.4 Replace this section with the following: 
3303.4 Vacant Lot. [ ← ] When a building is demolished, the permittee must remove all debris 
and remove all parts of the structure above grade except those parts that are necessary to provide 
support for the adjoining property. 
3303.8 Add a section as follows: 
3303.8 Special inspection. A registered civil engineer or licensed architect shall supervise the 
demolition work in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Building Official 
pursuant to Section 104A.2.1 to assure the work is proceeding in a safe manner and shall submit 
written progress reports to the Department in accordance with Section 1704.2.4. 

--- Page 150 ---
148 
SECTION 3304 – SITE WORK 
3304.1 Add a second paragraph as follows: 
   The City and County of San Francisco adopts Appendix J for the purpose of regulating 
excavation and grading. 
3304.1 Add a third paragraph as follows: 
   Temporary wood shoring and forms. All wood used for temporary shoring, lagging or forms 
that will be backfilled against or otherwise left permanently in place below grade shall be treated 
wood as defined in Section 2302. 
SECTION 3306 – PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS 
3306.10 Add a section as follows: 
3306.10 Chutes. Chutes for the removal of materials and debris shall be provided in all parts of 
demolition operations that are more than 20 feet (6.096 m) above the point where the removal of 
material is effected. Such chutes shall be completely enclosed. They shall not extend in an 
unbroken line for more than 25 feet (7.62 m) vertically but shall be equipped at intervals of 25 
feet (7.62 m) or less with substantial stops or offsets to prevent descending material from 
attaining dangerous speeds. 
   The bottom of each chute shall be equipped with a gate or stop with a suitable means for 
closing or regulating the flow of material. 
   Chutes, floors, stairways and other places affected shall be watered sufficiently to keep down 
the dust. 
3306.11 Add a section as follows: 
3306.11 Falling debris. Wood or other construction materials shall not be allowed to fall in 
large pieces onto an upper floor. Bulky materials, such as beams and columns, shall be lowered 
and not allowed to fall. 
3306.12 Add a section as follows: 
3306.12 Structure stability. In buildings of wood frame construction, the supporting structure 
shall not be removed until the parts of the structure being supported have been removed. 
   In buildings with basements, the first floor construction shall not be removed until the 
basement walls are braced to prevent overturning, or an analysis acceptable to the Building 
Official is submitted which shows the walls to be stable without bracing. 
SECTION 3307 – PROTECTION OF ADJACENT PROPERTY 
3307.1 Insert a note at the end of this section as follows: 
3307.1 Protection required. Adjacent public and private property shall be protected from 
damage during construction, remodeling and demolition work. Protection must be provided for 
footings, foundations, party walls, chimneys, skylights and roofs. Provisions shall be made to 
control water runoff and erosion during construction or demolition activities. The person making 
or causing an excavation to be made shall provide written notice to the owners of adjacent 
buildings advising them that the excavation is to be made and that the adjacent buildings should 
be protected. Said notification shall be delivered not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled 
starting date of the excavation. 
   Note: Other requirements for protection of adjacent property of adjacent and depth to which 
protection is requested are defined by California Civil Code Section 832, and is reprinted herein 
for convenience. 
      Section 832. Each coterminous owner is entitled to the lateral and subjacent support which 
his land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the owner of the adjoining land 

--- Page 151 ---
149 
to make proper and usual excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvement, 
under the following conditions: 
      1.   Any owner of land or his lessee intending to make or to permit an excavation shall give 
reasonable notice to the owner or owners of adjoining lands and of buildings or other structures, 
stating the depth to which such excavation is intended to be made, and when the excavating will 
begin. 
      2.   In making any excavation, ordinary care and skill shall be used, and reasonable 
precautions taken to sustain the adjoining land as such, without regard to any building or other 
structure which may be thereon, and there shall be no liability for damage done to any such 
building or other structure by reason of the excavation, except as otherwise provided or allowed 
by law. 
      3.   If at any time it appears that the excavation is to be of a greater depth than are the walls 
or foundations of any adjoining building or other structure, and is to be so close as to endanger 
the building or other structure in any way, then the owner of the building or other structure must 
be allowed at least 30 days, if he so desires, in which to take measures to protect the same from 
any damage, or in which to extend the foundations thereof, and he must be given for the same 
purposes reasonable license to enter on the land on which the excavation is to be or is being 
made. 
      4.   If the excavation is intended to be or is deeper than the standard depth of foundations, 
which depth is defined to be a depth of nine feet below the adjacent curb level, at the point where 
the joint property line intersects the curb and if on the land of the coterminous owner there is any 
building or other structure the wall or foundation of which goes to standard depth or deeper then 
the owner of the land on which the excavation is being made shall, if given the necessary license 
to enter on the adjoining land, protect the said adjoining land and any such building or other 
structure thereon without cost to the owner thereof, from any damage by reason of the 
excavation, and shall be liable to the owner of such property for any such damage, excepting 
only for minor settlement cracks in buildings or other structures. 
SECTION 3311 – STANDPIPES 
3311.2 Replace this section and title with the following: 
3311.2 [ ← ] Fire Safety During Demolition. All existing dry standpipes shall be maintained in 
an operative condition and with all inlets and outlets accessible for use within two floors of the 
highest remaining portion of a floor of the building. The inlets shall be so identified at the street 
level as to be easily located by the Fire Department. They shall be removed in place with floor 
removal and the upper ends capped above the highest remaining valve. The remaining system on 
the lower floors shall continue operative until all construction above the third floor has been 
removed. 
 
Chapter 34 
RESERVED 
   No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
 
Chapter 35 
REFERENCED STANDARDS 

--- Page 152 ---
150 
   No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
Add the following chapter: 
 
Chapter 36 
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE (CRC) 
(CRC) CHAPTER 1 
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 1 & 1A of the San Francisco Building Code. 
See Chapter 1A for the Administration provisions of the San Francisco Building Code. 
(CRC) CHAPTER 2 
DEFINITIONS 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code. 
(CRC) CHAPTER 3 
BUILDING PLANNING 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 4 
FOUNDATIONS 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 5 
FLOORS 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 6 
WALL CONSTRUCTION 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 7 
WALL COVERING 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 8 
ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 9 
ROOF ASSEMBLIES 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 10 
CHIMNEYS AND FIREPLACES 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 2 through 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) CHAPTER 44 
REFERENCED STANDARDS 
Replace this chapter with Chapter 35 of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) APPENDIX AA 
BOARD OF APPEALS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX AB 
PERMIT FEES 

--- Page 153 ---
151 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX AC 
RESERVED 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BA 
MANUFACTURED HOUSING USED AS DWELLINGS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BB 
TINY HOUSES 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BC 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADU) 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BD 
HOME DAY CARE OCCUPANCY 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BE 
RADON CONSTROL METHODS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BF 
PATIO COVERS 
Replace this chapter with Appendix I of the San Francisco Building Code 
(CRC) APPENDIX BG 
SOUND TRANSMISSION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BH 
AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATES 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BI 
LIGHT STRAW-CLAY CONSTRUCTION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BJ 
STRAWBALE CONSTRUCTION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BK 
COB CONSTRUCTION (MONOLITHID ADOBE) 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BL 
HEMP-LIME (HEMPCRETE) CONSTRUCTION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BM 
3D-PRINTED BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX BN 
EXTENDED PLATE WALL CONSTRUCTION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 

--- Page 154 ---
152 
(CRC) APPENDIX BO 
EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CA 
SIZING AND CAPACITIES OF GAS PIPING 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CB 
SIZING OF VENTING SYSTEMS SERVING APPLIANCES EQUIPPED WITH DRAFT 
HOODS, CATEGORY I APPLIANCES AND APPLIANCES LISTED FOR USE WITH 
TYPE B VENTS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CC 
RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE FOR SAFETY INSPECTION OF AN EXISTING 
APPLIANCE INSTALLATION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CD 
PIPING STANDARDS FOR VARIOUS APPLICATION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CE 
VENTING METHODS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CF 
SIZING OF WATER PIPING SYSTEM 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CG 
NONSEWERED SANITATION SYSTEMS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX CH 
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NA 
RESERVED 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NB (Rb) 
SOLAR-READY PROVISIONS – DETACHED ONE- AND TWO – FAMILY 
DWELLINGS AND TOWNHOUSES 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NC (Rc) 
ZERO NET ENERGY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PROVISIONS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX ND (Rd) 
ELECTRIC ENERGY STORAGE PROVISIONS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NE (Re) 
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 

--- Page 155 ---
153 
(CRC) APPENDIX NF(Rf) 
ALTERNATIVE BUILDING THERMAL ENVELOPE INSULATION R-VALUE 
OPTIONS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NG(Rg) 
2024 IECC STRETCH CODE 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NH(Rh) 
OPERATIONAL CARBON RATING AND ENERGY REPORTING 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NI(Ri) 
ON-SITE RENEWABLE ENERGY 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
 
(CRC) APPENDIX NJ(Rj) 
DEMAND RESPONSIVE CONTROLS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NK(Rk) 
ELECTRIC-READY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PROVISIONS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CRC) APPENDIX NL(Rl) 
RENEWABLE ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
 
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE (CBC) 
APPENDICES 
(CBC) APPENDIX A 
EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX B 
BOARD OF APPEALS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX C 
GROUP U–AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
(CBC) APPENDIX D 
FIRE DISTRICTS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX E 
RESERVED 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX F 
RODENTPROOFING 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 

--- Page 156 ---
154 
(CBC) APPENDIX G 
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX H 
SIGNS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX I 
PATIO COVERS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
APPENDIX J 
GRADING 
San Francisco adopts Appendix J as amended below for grading in San Francisco 
SECTION J103 – PERMITS REQUIRED 
J103.2 Add the following five exemptions: 
   8.   An excavation that (1) is less 2 feet (610 mm) in depth or (2) does not create a cut slope 
greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) in height and steeper than 1 unit vertical in 1-1/2 units horizontal 
(66.7% slope). 
   9.   A fill less than 1 foot (305 mm) in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter 
than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope), or less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth, not 
intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) on any one lot and 
does not obstruct a drainage course. 
   10.   Grading performed incidental to and in connection with the construction of a building or 
structure on a single lot, pursuant to a valid building permit issued therefor. The cost of such 
grading shall be included in the total valuation of the building for determining permit fees, and a 
separate grading permit will not be required. 
   11.   Grading necessary for and incidental to and in connection with the construction of any 
parks, public streets or roadways, or the construction of sewers, or utilities under or within the 
boundaries of such roadways or streets when such work is under the direct supervision of the 
Recreation and Park Department, the Department of Public Works, the Public Utilities 
Commission or other governmental agencies. 
   12.   Grading operations which in the opinion of the Director are of such a minor nature that 
the proposed work will not affect the adjoining land, or any existing structures, either those on 
the same or adjoining land. For such grading operations, the requirements of this chapter may be 
waived in whole or in part. 
SECTION J104 – PERMIT APPLICATION AND SUBMITTALS 
J104.3 Replace the exception as follows: 
   Exception: [ ← ] Grading conforming to all of the following requirements: 
   1.   No cut section is greater than 10 feet (3.048 m) in vertical height. 
   2.   No cut slope is steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical. 
   3.   The tops of cut banks are separated from any structure or major improvement by a distance, 
measured horizontally, equal to not less than the height of the bank. 
   4.   Not more than 5,000 cubic yards (3825 m3) shall be involved in grading. 
   5.   Grading performed at a site outside the limits of known slide areas. 
   All other grading shall require soils report and the grading plans shall include, but not limited 
to, the following information: 

--- Page 157 ---
155 
   (1)   The design of retaining walls or other structures used to support cuts or fills. Such 
retaining walls or structures, except when part of a building, may be constructed under this 
permit, provided the cost of same is included in the valuation shown on the application. 
   (2)   The sequencing of cut and fill operations in a manner that assures interim stability of the 
site. 
SECTION J106 – EXCAVATIONS 
J106.1 Delete all exceptions.[ ← ] 
SECTION J109 – DRAINAGE AND TERRACING 
J109 Add the following section: 
J109.5 Surface Drainage. All areas which are surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other paving of 
similar imperviousness, and which exceed a total area of 200 square feet (18.58 m2), shall have 
storm- and casual water drained directly to a public sewer or storm drain. 
   Drainage shall not be directed to flow onto adjacent property or to drain onto public sidewalks. 
See Section 1502.1 for roof drainage. 
SECTION J112 – GRADING FEES 
J112 Add the following section: 
SECTION J112 GRADING FEES 
   The permit and the plan review fees shall be per Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit 
Fees, Table 1A-A – Building Permit Fees. The valuation shall be based on the volume of 
earthwork. 
(CBC) APPENDIX K 
GROUP R-3 AND GROUPO R-3.1 OCCUPANCIES PROTECTED BY THE 
FACILITIES OF THE CENTRAL VALLEY FLOOD PROTECTION PLAN 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX L 
EARTHQUAKE RECORDING INSTRUMENTATION 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
(CBC) APPENDIX M 
TSUNAMI-GENERATED FLOOD HAZARD 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX N 
REPLICABLE BUILDINGS 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX O 
PERFORMANCE-BASED APPLICATION 
This appendix is not adopted in San Francisco 
(CBC) APPENDIX P 
SLEEPING LOFTS 
No San Francisco Building Code Amendments 
 
(CBC) APPENDIX Q 
EMERGENCY HOUSING 
San Francisco adopts Appendix PQ subject to the modifications set forth below 
SECTION Q101 – GENERAL 
PQ101.1 Revise this section as follows: 

--- Page 158 ---
156 
Q101.1 Scope. This appendix shall be applicable to emergency housing and emergency housing 
facilities, as defined in Section Q102. The provisions and standards set forth in this appendix 
shall be applicable to emergency housing established pursuant to the declaration of a shelter 
crisis under Government Code section 8698 et seq. and located in new or existing buildings, 
structures, or facilities owned, operated, erected, or constructed by, for, or on behalf of the City 
and County of San Francisco on land owned or leased by the City and County of San Francisco. 
SECTION Q103 – EMERGENCY HOUSING 
PQ103.2.1 Add exception 2 as follows: 
Q103.2.1 New additions, alterations, and change of occupancy. New additions, alterations, 
and change of occupancy to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements of the 
California Building Standards Code effective at the time of addition, alteration, or change of 
occupancy. The requirements shall apply only to and/or within the specific area of the addition, 
alteration, or change of occupancy. 
   Exceptions: 
      1.   Existing buildings and structures used for emergency housing and emergency housing 
facilities may not be required to comply with the California Energy Code, as determined by the 
enforcing agency. 
      2.   Change in occupancy shall not mandate conformance with new construction requirements 
set forth in the California Building Standards Code, provided such change in occupancy meets 
the minimum fire and safety requirements set forth in Section PQ111 of this appendix. 
PQ103.7 Add a section as follows: 
PQ103.7 Electrical. Emergency housing shall be provided with all of the following installed in 
compliance with the California Electrical Code: 
   1.   Continuous source of electricity. 
      Exception: The source of electricity may be solar power or emergency generator. 
   2.   At least one interior lighting fixture. 
SECTION Q110 – EMERGENCY HOUSING FACILITIES SANITATION 
REQUIREMENTS 
PQ110.2 Revise this section as follows: 
Q110.2 Kitchens and food facilities. Where provided, kitchens and food facilities, as defined in 
Section 113789 of the California Health and Safety Code, which support emergency housing 
sites, shall comply with applicable food safety provisions of Sections 113980–114094.5 of the 
California Health and Safety Code. 
   Where occupants of dependent units are permitted or required to cook for themselves, a 
separate area shall be equipped and maintained as a common use kitchen. Refrigerated storage 
shall be provided for safe storage of food. 
SECTION PQ111 – EMERGENCY HOUSING FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY 
REQUIREMENTS 
PQ111 Add the following sections: 
PQ111.1 Location on property. Buildings or structures used for emergency housing, including 
sleeping cabins, shall be located in accordance with the requirements of Table 602 and Section 
705 of the California Building Code, based on their type of construction and fire-resistance 
ratings of the exterior walls. During a shelter crisis, the fire separation distances are permitted to 
be measured to the existing buildings on the adjacent parcels rather than to the interior lot lines, 
provided the open spaces are to remain unobstructed for the duration of the shelter crisis. 

--- Page 159 ---
157 
PQ111.2 Buildings on same lot. Buildings or structures used for emergency housing, including 
sleeping cabins, shall be separated from each other and from other buildings on the same lot as 
set forth in Section 705.3 of the California Building Code. The Building Official and Fire 
Marshal may accept reasonable alternatives to these requirements provided reasonably 
equivalent fire and life safety is achieved. 
PQ111.3 Means of egress. Buildings or structures used for emergency housing shall be provided 
with means of egress complying with Chapter 10 of the California Building Code, unless 
modified elsewhere in this appendix. 
PQ111.4 Emergency escape and rescue. Each area of a building or structure used for sleeping 
purposes in emergency housing shall be provided with an emergency escape and rescue opening 
in accordance with Section 1030 1031 of the California Building Code, unless modified 
elsewhere in this appendix. 
PQ111.5 Smoke alarms. Buildings or structures used for emergency housing, which provide 
sleeping accommodations, shall be equipped with single station battery powered smoke alarms 
installed in accordance with the location requirements of Section 907.2.11 of the California Fire 
Code, unless modified elsewhere in this appendix. 
PQ111.6 Carbon monoxide alarms. Buildings or structures used for emergency housing, which 
provide sleeping accommodations, and equipped with fuel-burning appliances shall be provided 
with carbon monoxide detection in accordance with Section 915 of the California Fire Code, 
unless modified elsewhere in this appendix. 
PQ111.7 Fire alarm. A manual fire alarm system capable of arousing sleeping occupants in 
accordance with Section 907 of the California Fire Code shall be installed in buildings, 
structures, or groups of buildings or structures used for emergency housing. 
   Exception: Individual buildings or structures in a group of buildings or structures with 
sufficient separation distances to allow each building or structure to function independently in 
case of a fire, as approved by the Fire Marshal. 
PQ111.8 Automatic sprinkler systems. Fire sprinklers shall be provided for new and existing 
buildings or structures used for emergency housing, including sleeping cabins, which provide 
sleeping facilities, as required by Section 903.3 of the California Fire Code. Strict compliance 
with the requirements of Section 903.3 may not be required when approved by the Fire Marshal. 
The Fire Marshal is authorized to accept reasonably equivalent alternatives to the installation 
provisions of Section 903.3 when dealing with buildings or structures used for emergency 
housing. 
PQ111.9 Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided in accordance with 
Section 906.1 of the California Fire Code. 
PQ111.10 Flammable or combustible liquids. The possession or storage of any flammable or 
combustible liquids or gases shall not be permitted (intact cigarette lighters excepted). The use of 
any type of open flame indoors is prohibited unless conditionally approved by the Fire Chief. 
PQ111.11 Storage in attics, under-floor, and in concealed spaces. Combustible materials, 
including but not limited to the possessions of occupants, users, and staff shall not be stored in 
attics, under-floor spaces, or within other concealed spaces of buildings or structures used for 
emergency housing with sleeping accommodations. 
PQ111.12 Fire department access. Fire Department access to building and premises used for 
emergency housing shall be in compliance with Section 503, Appendix D and Section 504 of the 
California Fire Code, as approved by the Fire Chief. 

--- Page 160 ---
158 
PQ111.13 Water supply. An approved fire protection water supply complying with Section 507 
of the California Fire Code, or as approved by the Fire Chief, shall be provided for each 
structure, group of structures or premises used for emergency housing. 
SECTION PQ112 – ALTERNATIVES AND MODIFICATIONS 
PQ112 Add the following section: 
PQ112.1 Alternatives and modifications. Alternative compliance and/or modifications that are 
reasonably equivalent to the requirements in this appendix may be granted by the Local 
Administrative Authority in individual cases when dealing with buildings or structures used for 
emergency housing. 
 
 
 
 
 