--- Page 1 ---
Page | 1 
 
PLUMBING CODE 
2025 Edition 
 
PREFACE 
Text Format: 
   The text in this publication is formatted to allow the user to quickly and easily determine the 
source of the included material. Language derived from the 2025 California Code that 
is unchanged by local amendment is printed in shaded text (see below). Language constituting 
San Francisco amendments to the California Code is printed in unformatted (or “plain”) text. In 
either case, bold and/or italic typefaces may be used as appropriate for emphasis, etc. See below 
for examples. 
   To further simplify use of the San Francisco amendments with corresponding sections of the 
2025 California Code, explanatory remarks appearing in italics are provided (in boxes at the 
beginning of affected provisions) indicating whether the San Francisco amendment to the 
California Code is adding, revising, or replacing a section or portion of a section. 
 
   To summarize: 
Explanatory remarks are boxed and italicized. 
   Unchanged language from the 2025 California Code is shaded, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
   San Francisco amendments are printed in unformatted ("plain") text, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
Marginal Markings: 
   An arrow [ ← ] represents the location of language that has been deleted by San Francisco 
from the 2022 California Code. 
   Material altered after the initial adoption of the 2025 San Francisco Mechanical Code is shown 
by a solid vertical line at the left margin of the text. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
Page | 2 
 
Chapter 1 
ADMINISTRATION 
Division I 
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments 
Division II 
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101.0 – GENERAL 
101.1 Revise this section as follows: 
101.1 Title. This document shall be known as the “ [ ← ] 2025 San Francisco Plumbing Code,” 
may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.” 
SECTION 103.0 – DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY 
HAVING JURISDICTION 
103.1 Replace the third paragraph with the following: 
 [ ← ]    The Authority Having Jurisdiction, when necessary, may call upon the Police 
Department and other City and County of San Francisco agencies for aid or assistance in 
carrying out or enforcing any of the provisions of this code. 
103.4 Revise the first paragraph of this section as follows: 
103.4 Right of Entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of 
this code or other codes or ordinances, or where the Authority Having Jurisdiction has 
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon premises a condition or 
violation of this code or other codes or ordinances that makes the building or premises unsafe, 
insanitary, dangerous or hazardous, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to enter 
the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed upon the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction by this code or other codes or ordinances, provided that where 
such building or premises is occupied, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall present credentials 
to the occupant and request entry. Where such building or premises is unoccupied, the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person 
having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. Where entry is refused, 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction has recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
103.5 Add the following section: 
103.5 Rules and Regulations. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the power to render 
interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations to clarify 
the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in 
conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such rules and regulations, commonly 
referred to as “Code Rulings” and “Administrative Bulletins” supplemental to this code, shall not 
take effect until approved by the Building Inspection Commission and signed by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction except in unusual circumstances where the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
has determined that there is an immediate need to protect the public health and safety. When the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction finds that such circumstances exist, the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction may order immediate enforcement of a particular rule or regulation. The Authority 


--- Page 3 ---
Page | 3 
 
Having Jurisdiction shall arrange for a subscription service to such rules and regulations, the 
entire cost of which is to be borne by the subscribers. 
103.6 Add the following section: 
103.6 Code Revisions. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall transmit to the Building 
Inspection Commission, at intervals not exceeding three years, recommendations for changes to 
this code, based on studies of the following: 
   1.   Requests of the Board of Examiners for variances from this code, and for approvals of 
alternate materials, alternate designs and methods of construction. 
   2.   Code changes recommended by the Board of Examiners. 
   3.   Code changes recommended by the Code Advisory Committee or other bodies subordinate 
to the Building Inspection Commission. 
   4.   Results obtained and problems encountered in legal actions taken to correct code 
violations. 
   5.   Changes or improvements in materials, methods of construction or design, and changes 
proposed by interested persons. 
   6.   Investigations of fire and structural damage to buildings, and of determination of 
unsatisfactory building performance. 
   7.   Periodic changes to the California Plumbing Code and other State regulations which may 
affect this code. 
   8.   Administrative Bulletins and Code Rulings currently in effect. 
   9.   Violations of the code found on inspections or investigations. 
103.7 Add the following section: 
103.7 Modifications. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the 
provisions of this code, the Authority Having Jurisdiction may grant modifications for individual 
cases. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall first find that a special individual reason makes 
the strict letter of this code impractical and that the modification is in conformance with the 
intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen the standard of this 
code to safeguard life or limb, health, property, or public welfare. The details of any action 
granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Department of Building 
Inspection. 
SECTION 104.0 – PERMITS 
104.1 Add the following as the second paragraph of this section: 
   Emergency work for the protection of life or limb, health, property and public welfare shall 
have a permit obtained within one day of commencing such work, excluding Saturdays, Sundays 
and legal holidays. 
104.1.1 Add the following section: 
104.1.1 Homeowner’s Permit. A permit for plumbing work in, on or about a single-family 
dwelling may be issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, provided said work is done by the 
owner or a family member who has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the administrative 
authority, his or her qualifications to satisfactorily perform the plumbing work in the dwelling 
which is, or is intended to be, occupied by the owner. If the plumbing work performed under the 
homeowner’s permit does not comply with the requirements of this code and if the corrections 
are not made as required by the Department of Building Inspection, then the work shall be 
corrected by a State-licensed plumbing contractor under a separate permit. 
   Such State-licensed plumbing contractor shall be required to pay only the permit issuance fee 
as set forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-C - Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection 
Fees - of the Building Code. If additional inspection is required, the appropriate fees as set forth 

--- Page 4 ---
Page | 4 
 
in Section 110A, Table 1A-C - Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection Fees and 
Table 1A-G - Inspection, Surveys and Reports - of the Building Code shall apply. 
104.1.2 Add the following section: 
104.1.2 Amending Applications. After a permit has been issued and an inspection of the work 
has been made, the scope of the permit may be altered by filing an amended permit application 
and paying fees for any additional work as set forth in Table 1A-C - Plumbing/Mechanical 
Permit Issuance and Inspection Fees and Table 1A-G - Inspections, Survey, and Reports of 
Section 110A of the Building Code. 
104.2 Replace Section 104.2(1) and the first paragraph of Section 104.2(2) as follows:  
104.2 Exempt Work. A permit shall not be required for the following: [ ← ]  
   (1)   Repair of leaks not requiring cutting into or removing piping. 
   (2)   Unstopping of traps, sewers, vents or waste pipes not requiring cutting into or removal of 
traps or piping. 
   (3)   Replacement, repair or maintenance of faucets, angle stops, hose bibbs or roof drain not 
requiring cutting into or removal of piping. 
   (4)   Replacement of toilets except in structures with alternate water piping. 
   (5)   Replacement of furnace filters. 
   (6)   Removal of drainage, water or gas piping from a building when the water supply, gas and 
drainage lines have been disconnected in an approved manner under a permit. 
   (7)   Work involved in setting up for display of plumbing fixtures or appliances, when not 
connected to any supply or drainage lines, in a sales establishment. 
   (8)   Replacement of water conservation devices not requiring cutting into or removal of 
piping. 
   (9)   Work performed in buildings or structures owned and occupied by the State and Federal 
governments. 
104.3 Replace this section as follows: 
104.3 Application for Permit. [ ← ] Permit applicants shall file with the Department of 
Building Inspection an application on a form furnished for that purpose. 
   A permit for inspection of the proposed plumbing work set forth in the application will be 
issued to State-licensed contractors or to homeowners subject to the requirements of Section 
104.1.1. A separate permit shall be obtained for each separate building, structure or property. 
104.3.2 Replace this section as follows: 
104.3.2 [ ← ] Inspections Not Covered by Permit Fees. 
104.3.2.1 Off Hours of Inspection. Off-hour inspection may be performed outside normal 
inspection hours by prior arrangement and prepayment of fees as set forth in Section 110A , 
Table 1A-G - Inspections, Surveys and Reports - of the Building Code. 
104.3.2.2 Reinspections. A reinspection fee shall be assessed for each inspection or reinspection 
made necessary by any of the following conditions: 
   (1)   When the portion of the work for which the inspection is requested is not complete or 
code complying. 
   (2)   When previously identified deficiencies in the work are not properly corrected. 
   (3)   When the approved construction documents are not available to the inspector. 
   (4)   When access is not provided on the date and time of the inspection appointment. 
   (5)   When work deviates from the approved construction documents. 
   The first reinspection for failure to comply with code requirements shall not be assessed a 
reinspection fee. All subsequent reinspections for the same or subsequent errors or omissions 
shall be charged a reinspection fee. 

--- Page 5 ---
Page | 5 
 
   Subsequent to inspector determination of reinspection fee requirements, no required or 
requested inspections shall be made nor shall the job be given a certificate of final completion 
and occupancy or final approval until the required reinspection fees are paid. See Section 110A, 
Table 1A-G - Inspections, Surveys and Reports - of the Building Code for applicable fees. 
104.3.2.3 Survey. A plumbing survey may be requested when a plumbing inspector’s assistance 
is desired to establish code compliance of existing or proposed plumbing system requirements. 
See Section 110A , Table 1A-G - Inspections, Survey and Reports - of the Building Code for 
applicable fees. 
104.4 Add a new second paragraph to this section as follows: 
   An issued permit entitles the permittee to proceed with the work described therein. The 
issuance of a permit does not constitute approval of any work done under that permit. Permits 
shall not be transferable. 
104.4.3 Replace this section as follows: 
104.4.3 Permit Expiration. [ ← ] Plumbing permits expire per Section 106A.4.4 of the San 
Francisco Building Code. Permit fees may be partially refunded if a written cancellation request 
is made to the Building Official prior to commencement of the permitted work and within 90 
days of the date of permit issuance. See Section 110A , Table 1A-R - Refunds - of the Building 
Code for refunds. 
104.4.3.2 Add the following section: 
104.4.3.2 Commencement of Work on Permit Expired Due to Work Not Started. A new 
permit shall be obtained to undertake the work described on an expired permit on which no work 
was performed. If not more than one year has elapsed since the expiration of the original permit, 
the applicant is eligible for reduced fees. See Section 110A , Table 1A-B - Other Building Permit 
and Plan Review Fees - of the Building Code for applicable fees. 
   If a refund has been granted per Section 104.4.3, the applicant shall not be eligible for the 
reduced fees as set forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-B - Other Building Permit and Plan Review 
Fees - of the Building Code. 
104.4.3.3 Add the following section: 
104.4.3.3 Recommencement of Work on Permit Expired Due to Work Not Completed. The 
applicant shall obtain a new permit for the work not completed. The permit fee shall be based on 
work remaining to be done. Fees shall be as set forth in Section 110A , Table 1A-C - 
Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection Fees - of the Building Code. 
104.5 Replace this section as follows: 
104.5 Permit Fees. [ ← ] Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the Central 
Permit Bureau the fees as set forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-C - Plumbing/Mechanical Permit 
Issuance and Inspection Fees - of the Building Code. The replacement of a plumbing fixture or a 
gas appliance without a change in drainage, piping or venting shall not require the payment of 
permit issuance fee. A separate permit issuance fee shall be paid for each class of work, i.e., 
sewers and drainage, gas and water. 
   Final inspection will not be made unless all outstanding fees related to the permit work have 
been paid. 
104.5.2 Revise this section as follows: 
104.5.2 Investigation Fees. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected 
whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. [ ← ] See Section 110A, Table 1A-C - 
Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection Fees, and Table 1A-K - Penalties, 
Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments - of the Building Code for applicable fees. The 

--- Page 6 ---
Page | 6 
 
payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt a person from compliance with other 
provisions of this code, nor from a penalty prescribed by law. 
   The Director may reduce the investigation fee to two times the amount of the permit fee as 
called for in Section 110A, Table 1A-C - Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection 
Fees - of the Building Code for work that was constructed prior to the current building ownership 
or for work without permit which was done prior to January 1, 1967, if the owner files with the 
Director a notarized affidavit together with documents substantiating such dates of work. 
   Appeals of investigation fees may be filed with the Board of Appeals in the manner provided 
in Section 8 et seq. of the Business & Tax Regulations Code. Such filing shall be subject to the 
fees and rules of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, in reviewing the appeal, may 
reduce the appealed amount to not less than two times the permit fee as set forth in 
Section 110A, Table 1A-C - Plumbing/Mechanical Permit Issuance and Inspection Fees - of the 
Building Code. 
104.5.3 Replace this section as follows: 
104.5.3 Fee Refunds. [ ← ] For fee refunds, see Section 107A.6 of the Building Code. 
SECTION 105.0 – INSPECTIONS AND TESTING 
105.2.6 Revise the fourth paragraph as follows: 
   To obtain reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefore in writing upon a form 
furnished for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with [ ← ] Section 110A, 
Table 1A-G - Inspections, Surveys and Reports - of the Building Code. 
SECTION 106.0 – VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
106.3 Replace this section as follows: 
106.3 Penalties. [ ← ] Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, who violates, 
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists or opposes the execution of any of 
the provisions of this code, shall be liable for a civil penalty, not to exceed $500 for each day 
such violation is committed or permitted to continue, which penalty shall be assessed and 
recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people of the City and County of San 
Francisco by the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any penalty assessed and 
recovered in an action brought pursuant to this paragraph shall be paid to the City Treasurer and 
credited to the Department of Building Inspection’s Special Fund. 
   Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects 
or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the execution of any of the provisions of this 
code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine 
not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and 
imprisonment, unless otherwise provided in this code, and shall be deemed guilty of a separate 
offense for every day such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal shall continue. 
Any person who shall do any work in violation of any of the provisions of this code, and any 
person having charge of such work who shall permit it to be done, shall be liable for the penalty 
provided. 
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the posting of any notice provided for in 
this code or to tear down or mutilate any such notice posted by the Department of Building 
Inspection. 
106.5 Revise this section as follows: 
106.5 Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies. The Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall have the authority to disconnect a plumbing system to a building, structure or equipment 

--- Page 7 ---
Page | 7 
 
regulated by this code in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to 
life or property. For notification procedures, see Section 102A.16 of the Building Code. 
SECTION 107.0 – BOARD OF APPEALS 
107.0 Replace this title and the entire section as follows: 
 [ ← ] 107.0 Board of Examiners. Application may be made to the Board of Examiners for 
approval of alternate materials, methods and types of construction and for variances from the 
provisions of this code. See Building Code, Section 105A.1. 
108.0 Add the following section: 
SECTION 108.0 – ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE 
108.0 Abatement of Public Nuisance. In order to abate a nuisance as defined in Section 216.0 
of this code, the inspection and abatement procedures as set forth in Section 102A of the 
Building Code, including, but not limited to, Section 102A.3 through 102A.8, shall apply. 
109.0 Add the following section: 
SECTION 109.0 – REPAIRS TO DEFECTIVE BUILDING 
SEWERS 
109.0 Repairs to Defective Building Sewers 
109.1 General. Any defective building sewer found to be a nuisance or hazardous to the public 
shall be repaired at the owner’s expense by a licensed plumbing contractor in accordance with 
this code. In the event the owner fails to repair the defective building sewer after written notice 
has been sent the owner by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall abate the condition in accordance with Section 102A of the Building Code. 
109.2 Cost of Repairs by City and County of San Francisco. Whenever the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, pursuant to the authority conferred by this code and the Building Code, shall cause a 
building sewer to be repaired or replaced, the cost thereof shall be paid from the “Plumbing 
Building Sewer Revolving Fund” and assessed against the property served by said building 
sewer. 
109.3 Plumbing Building Sewer Revolving Fund. A special revolving fund, to be known as the 
“Plumbing Building Sewer Revolving Fund,” is hereby created for the purpose of defraying the 
costs and expenses which may be incurred by the Department of Building Inspection in carrying 
out the authority conferred by this code to repair or replace defective building sewers. 
   The Board of Supervisors shall transfer one-half of the funds appropriated to the “Side Sewer 
Repair” fund of the Department of Building Inspection or shall appropriate, establish or increase 
the special revolving fund with such funds as it may deem necessary in order to expedite 
performance of the work of repairing or replacing defective building sewers. The special 
revolving fund shall be replenished with all funds collected under the proceeding hereinafter 
provided for, either upon voluntary payments or as a result of the sale of the property after 
delinquency, or otherwise. Balances remaining in the Plumbing Building Sewer Revolving Fund 
at the close of any fiscal year shall be carried forward in such fund. 
109.4 Assessment for Costs. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall take action to have the 
costs of all work done or caused to be done pursuant to this Section 109.0 assessed against the 
parcel or parcels of land upon which said building is served by the building sewer per 
Section 102A of the Building Code. Such costs shall include, in addition to all costs related to 
repairing or replacing the building sewer or demolishing and clearing the site, the City and 
County of San Francisco’s costs in administering the required work. See Section 110A, Table 
1A-K - Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments - of the Building Code for the 
applicable fee. 

--- Page 8 ---
Page | 8 
 
Chapter 2 
DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 201.0 – GENERAL 
201.1 Add the following to the end of the first sentence: 
Where words, terms and phrases are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meaning 
within the context with which they are used. 
SECTION 204.0 – B 
204.0 Add the following definition: 
Boiler. A closed vessel used for heating water or liquid, or for generating steam or vapor by 
direct application of heat from combustible fuels or electricity. 
SECTION 208.0 – F 
208.0 Add the following definition: 
Foot Vent - See “Relief Vent,” Section 220.0. 
SECTION 216.0 – N 
216.0 Add the following items after Item (3) under definition of “Nuisance”: 
   (4)   Open, unsecured, leaking, plugged or otherwise defective sewer, gas or water lines. 
   (5)   Inadequate plumbing system maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or damage. 
   (6)   Plumbing or plumbing fixtures, gas appliances or piping installed in violation of this code 
or without permit. 
   (7)   Where a change in occupancy classification is made without complying with the 
applicable provisions of this code and the Building Code. 
SECTION 218.0 – P 
218.0 Revise this definition as follows: 
Plumbing System. Includes all potable water, alternate water sources, building supply, and 
distribution pipes; all plumbing fixtures and traps; all drainage and vent pipes; and all building 
drains and building sewers, including their respective joints and connections, devices, receptors, 
and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises and shall include potable water 
piping, potable water treating or using equipment, medical gas and medical vacuum systems, 
liquid and fuel gas piping, and water heaters and vents for same, and fire sprinkler systems. 
Plumbing systems shall include all plumbing appliances, plumbing appurtenances and plumbing 
fixtures. 
SECTION 221.0 – S 
221.0 Add the following definition: 
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper 
surface of the floor next above. For the purposes of this code, balcony, loft and mezzanine levels 
that contain plumbing outlets are also to be considered as stories. 
 
 
 

--- Page 9 ---
Page | 9 
 
Chapter 3 
GENERAL REGULATIONS 
SECTION 313.0 – HANGERS AND SUPPORTS 
313.2 Add the following sections: 
313.9 313.2 Materials. 
313.9.1 313.2.1 Plumber’s tape hanger iron may be used to secure pipe not greater than 2 inches 
(50.8 mm) in diameter. 
313.9.2 313.2.2 Hanger iron shall be galvanized and not thinner than 22 gauge, 1/32-inch thick 
(0.8 mm) and 3/4-inch (19.05 mm) wide, securely nailed or screwed to the structure. When the 
strap-iron is formed around the pipe, it shall be secured with a 1/4-inch (6.35 mm) stove bolt. 
 
Chapter 4 
PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 
SECTION 405 – PROHIBITED FIXTURES 
405.0 Add the following section: 
405.4 Watercloset-Sink Combinations. Watercloset-Sink combinations are not allowed in 
structures with treated alternate water piping. 
SECTION 415.0 – DRINKING FOUNTAINS 
415.2 Add the following section: 
415.2.1 Drink Tap Stations. New construction that provides one or more drinking fountains 
shall provide a Drink Tap Station per San Francisco Environment Code Section 2304. 
 
Chapter 5 
WATER HEATERS 
SECTION 504.0 – WATER HEATER REQUIREMENTS 
504.1 Add the following as the first paragraph of this section: 
504.1 Location. Water Heaters mounted on the exterior of a building and located 7' or more 
above the floor or grade shall be provided with a permanent platform capable of supporting a 
tester or maintenance person. 
Chapter 6 
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 
SECTION 603.0 – CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 
603.1 Add a third paragraph to this section as follows: 
   Structures with alternate water piping shall have a Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow 
Prevention Assembly installed on the domestic supply as close as practical to the meter. 
603.2 Revise Table 603.2 as follows: 

--- Page 10 ---
Page | 10 
 
Add a footnote for the Applicable Standards heading that states: 
All backflow prevention assemblies or devices that are testable must have passed laboratory and 
field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization. 
Revise the tenth entry in the Table to read as follows: 
  
Backflow preventer for 
Carbonated Beverage 
Dispensers (two 
independent check valves 
with a vent to the 
atmosphere) 
ASSE 
1022 
X -
- 
X -
- 
Installation includes carbonated beverage machines 
or dispensers. These devices operate under 
intermittent or continuous pressure conditions. This 
device is only permitted in systems with no upstream 
copper pipe. Otherwise, a reduced pressure principle 
backflow prevention assembly is required. 
  
603.5.6.4 Add the following section: 
603.5.6.4 Approval. All such installations shall be approved in writing by the San Francisco 
Water Department prior to installation. 
603.5.12 Revise section as follows: 
603.5.12 Beverage Dispensers. Potable water supply to beverage dispensers, carbonated 
beverage dispensers, or coffee machines shall be protected by an air gap, a reduced pressure 
principle backflow prevention assembly, or a vented backflow preventer that complies with 
ASSE 1022, except that a vented backflow preventer may not be used to protect carbonated 
beverage dispensers in systems with upstream copper pipe. For carbonated beverage dispensers, 
piping material installed downstream of the backflow preventer shall not be affected by carbon 
dioxide gas. 
603.5.23 Add the following section: 
603.5.22 603.5.23 Industrial Water Chillers. Potable water connections to closed-loop 
industrial water chillers shall be protected from backflow by a reduced pressure principle 
backflow prevention assembly in accordance with Table 603.2. 
SECTION 604.0 – MATERIALS 
604.1 Add the following sentence to the end of the second paragraph: 
Connections between copper water piping and ferrous materials shall be made with dielectric or 
insulated fittings or brass nipples of 6 inches (152.4 mm) minimum length. 
SECTION 606.0 – VALVES 
606.2 Revise this section as follows: 
606.2 Fullway Valve. A fullway valve controlling outlets shall be installed on the discharge side 
of each water meter and each unmetered water supply as near as possible to the point after where 
the water supply enters the building and before the first fitting or branch line. Water piping 
supplying more than one building on one premise shall be equipped with a separate fullway 
valve to each building, so arranged that the water supply can be turned on or off to any 
individual or separate building provided; however, that supply piping to a single-family 
residence and building accessory thereto shall be permitted to be controlled by one valve. Such 
shutoff valves shall be accessible. A fullway valve shall be installed on the discharge piping from 
water supply tanks at or near the tank. A fullway valve shall be installed on the cold water supply 
pipe to each water heater at or near the water heater. In cases where one water heater or boiler 
supplies hot water to multiple units additional fullway valves will be installed so that the hot 
water supplies to any apartment / unit / dwelling or condominium can be shut off without 
interrupting the hot water supply to any other apartment / unit / dwelling or condominium. These 

--- Page 11 ---
Page | 11 
 
valves shall be accessible in the dwelling unit they control or other common area within the 
building. 
606.3 Revise this section as follows: 
606.3 Multidwelling Units. In multidwelling units, one or more shutoff valves shall be provided 
in each dwelling unit so that the hot and cold water [ ← ] supplies to [ ← ] any apartment / unit / 
dwelling or condominium can be shut off without [ ← ] interrupting the water supply 
to [ ← ] another apartment / unit / dwelling or condominium. These valves shall be accessible in 
the dwelling unit they control or other common area within the building. 
606.3.1 Add the following section: 
606.3.1 Any apartment / unit / dwelling or condominium where a remodel is performed shall 
meet the requirements of sections 606.2, 606.3 and 606.5. 
606.5 Revise this section as follows: 
606.5 Control Valve. A control valve shall be installed immediately ahead of each plumbing 
fixture hot and cold water supply and water supplied appliances [ ← ] to permit servicing and 
replacement of individual fixtures. 
606.11 Add the following section: 
606.11 Backflow Assembly. All buildings four stories or more in height or water supply greater 
than 40 feet above the water meter shall have an approved backflow assembly installed as near as 
possible to the water meter and before the first fitting or branch line. The backflow assembly 
installed shall be in accordance to the degree of hazard within the building, but in no case less 
than an approved double check assembly. See Table 603.2. 
SECTION 609.0 – INSTALLATION, TESTING, UNIONS AND 
LOCATION 
609.11.2 Add the following section: 
609.11.2 Air Chambers. Air chambers shall be installed on all hot and cold water outlets 
supplying quick-acting valves to provide water hammer relief. The size of each air chamber shall 
be 24 times the diameter of the fixture supply. 
609.11.3 Add the following section: 
609.11.3 Quick-Acting Valves. The following valves shall be considered quick-acting: 
flushometers, single-handle faucets, single-handle tub and tub/shower combination control 
valves, single-handle shower control valves, rapid response electric solenoid valves (such as used 
on ice-makers, clothes washers, etc.) and any other appliance or fixture that dispenses water in a 
quick open and close method in its operation. 
 
Chapter 7 
SANITARY DRAINAGE 
Part I – DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
SECTION 701.0 – GENERAL 
701.2(2)(a) Revise this section as follows: 
701.2(2)(a)   ABS and PVC installations are limited to not more than two stories of areas 
of commercial or private residential accommodations. 
701.2(3) Revise this section as follows: 

--- Page 12 ---
Page | 12 
 
701.2(3)   No vitrified clay pipe or fittings shall be used aboveground or where pressurized by a 
pump or ejector or underground within the foundation line of the building. They shall be kept not 
less than 12 inches (305 mm) belowground. 
701.2(7) Add the following section: 
701.2(7)   Copper tubing shall not be used for urinal drainage or applications which are 
detrimental to the integrity of copper tubing. 
SECTION 706.0 – CHANGES IN DIRECTION OF DRAINAGE 
FLOW 
706.4 Revise this section as follows: 
706.4 Vertical to Horizontal. Vertical drainage lines connecting with horizontal drainage lines 
shall enter through 45 degree (0.79 rad) wye branches, combination wye and one-eighth bend 
branches, or other approved fittings of equivalent sweep. Branches or offsets of 60 degrees (1.05 
rad) shall be permitted to be used where installed in a true vertical position. In buildings more 
than three stories in height, any fixture within 10 feet (304 mm) of the connection of the vertical 
to horizontal change shall enter the horizontal drainage line at least 10 feet (304 mm) 
downstream from the change or may connect into the next vertical downstream line. 
SECTION 710.0 – DRAINAGE OF FIXTURES LOCATED 
BELOW THE NEXT UPSTREAM MANHOLE OR BELOW THE 
MAIN SEWER LEVEL 
710.1.1 Add the following section: 
710.1.1 Drainage of Fixtures Located Below the Fresh Air Inlet. Where a fixture is installed 
with the flood rim level equal to or lower than the elevation of the fresh air inlet serving the 
house trap, the piping serving the fixture shall be protected by installing an approved type of 
backwater valve. Where a fixture is installed with the flood rim level higher than the elevation of 
the fresh air inlet serving the house trap, the fixture shall not discharge through such backwater 
valve. 
 
Chapter 8 
INDIRECT WASTES 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 9 
VENTS 
SECTION 901.0 – GENERAL 
901.1 Add the following second paragraph to this section: 
   No mechanical device shall be installed in any venting system. Such venting system shall 
remain unobstructed to an approved termination. 
SECTION 907.0 – VENT STACKS AND RELIEF VENTS 
907.1 Revise the first sentence of this section as follows: 

--- Page 13 ---
Page | 13 
 
907.1 Drainage Stack. Each drainage stack that extends [ ← ] six (6) or more stories shall be 
served by a parallel vent stack, which shall extend undiminished in size from its upper terminal 
and connect to the drainage stack at or immediately below the lowest fixture drain. 
907.3 Add the following section: 
907.3 Vent Stacks and Relief Vents. Every building in which plumbing is installed shall have at 
least one main stack which shall run undiminished in size and as directly as possible from each 
building drain serving said building through to the open air above the roof. 
   For the purposes of this section, the main stack shall be defined as the largest size stack that is 
connected to a building drain or sewer. 
   A vent stack shall be installed with a soil or waste stack whenever relief vents or other branch 
vents are required in two or more branch intervals. A vent stack shall be installed in accordance 
with Section 706.1. 
   The size of the soil stack shall be determined by the total fixture units on that stack as per 
Table 703.2. 
SECTION 911.0 – CIRCUIT VENTING 
911.0 Revise this section as follows: 
911.0 Circuit Venting. Circuit venting is not permitted unless it is approved as an alternative 
engineered design in accordance with Section 301.5 of this Code. 
 
Chapter 10 
TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 
1001.3 Add the following section: 
1001.3 Placement and Minimum Size of Building Traps. The building sewer or building drain 
shall have a building trap placed as near as possible to the curb line or immediately inside any 
subsidewalk basement wall under the sidewalk. Trap size shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 
mm). 
SECTION 1008.0 – BUILDING TRAPS 
1008.1 Revise this section as follows: 
1008.1 General. Building traps shall not be installed except where required by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. Each building trap where installed shall be provided with a cleanout and 
with a relieving vent or fresh-air intake on the inlet side of the trap.  [ ← ]  Such trap shall have a 
fresh air inlet of not less than 4 inch (101.6 mm) diameter pipe. The inlet shall be covered by an 
approved perforated plate not less than 16 square inches (10,323 mm2). Perforations shall be not 
more than 3/8 inch (9.6 mm) diameter and provide an aggregate open area of not less than one-
half the cross-sectional area of the sewer trap. The air inlet shall be connected to the building 
side of the trap and shall lead to the open air, terminating at a point not less than 10 feet (3.05 m) 
from any window or door. 
SECTION 1016.0 – SAND INTERCEPTORS 
1016.3 Add the following section: 
1016.3.1 When drains are provided for planter boxes, such drains shall enter into the sanitary or 
storm drainage plumbing system by discharging into an approved sump, receiving tank or sand 
settling tank. No trap shall be installed between the planter box and any approved receptor. Sizes 
of drains shall conform to Table 703.2. 

--- Page 14 ---
Page | 14 
 
   Catch basins or sumps to drain surface water or collect subsoil drainage shall meet the 
following requirements: 
   (1)   The catch basin or sump shall be poured in place, and all sides and bottom shall be 
watertight. 
   (2)   A removable metal grill approved for applied design loads shall be placed on top with a 
screen to prevent mosquito breeding. 
   (3)   Each catch basin shall be served with its own trap and cleanout, and shall connect to the 
storm or sanitary system independently. 
   (4)   If inlet is located below the building sewer or drain, a sump pump minimum of 1-1/2" 
(38.1 mm) outlet may be used. The bottom of sump shall maintain a 1' - 0" (304.8 mm) distance 
from the inlet, creating a 1' - 0" (304.8 mm) sand trap. 
   (5)   If the depth of the sump is over 5' - 0" (1.52 m) a larger catch basin shall be required with 
a permanent ladder securely bolted to the interior to provide access for maintenance. A minimum 
clear space of 30" × 30" (762 mm × 762 mm) shall be provided. 
   (6)   A listed and approved plastic catch basin may be installed in areas of residential buildings 
that are not subjected to any vehicular traffic and shall be installed on a concrete base to prevent 
settling, provided all other code requirements of this section and the listing and installation 
requirements of such catch basin are met. 
 
Chapter 11 
STORM DRAINAGE 
SECTION 1101.0 – GENERAL 
1101.2.1 Add the following section: 
1101.2.1 Leaders, Connection to Drain. All storm water or casual water from roof areas, 
balconies, lightwells, courtyards or similar areas which total more than 200 square feet (18.4 
square meters) aggregate shall drain or be conveyed directly to the building drain, or building 
sewer, or to an approved alternate location based on approved geotechnical and engineering 
designs. Such drainage shall not be directed to flow onto adjacent property or over public way, 
including sidewalks. The opening of the leader shall meet the same requirements as Section 
1103.0 of the California Plumbing Code. 
1101.2.2 Add the following section: 
1101.2.2 Temporary Provisions. When the stormwater sewer is not yet installed, the building 
stormwater drainage system may discharge into the sewer on the street side of the main trap as 
near to the curbline as possible. 
1101.2.3 Add the following section: 
1101.2.3 Temporary Provisions Drain Trap. When, under the provisions of Section 1101.2.2 
the building stormwater drainage system discharges to the sewer, a trap shall be placed in that 
drain at a point near where it branches into the sewer. The trap shall be supplied with clean water 
by an approved means such as a hose bibb or trap primer. 
 
 

--- Page 15 ---
Page | 15 
 
Chapter 12 
FUEL GAS PIPING 
SECTION 1210.0 – GAS PIPING INSTALLATION  
1210.3. Installation of Aboveground Piping 
Add additional item (7) to list. 
(7) Gas piping in exterior locations, except as otherwise regulated by this code, shall be of 
galvanized iron or steel, with galvanized fittings. 
 
Chapter 13 
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS 
AND VACUUM SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
 
Chapter 14 
FIRESTOP PROTECTION 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 15 
ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR 
NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 16 
NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT 
SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Chapter 17 
REFERENCED STANDARDS 

--- Page 16 ---
Page | 16 
 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix A 
RECOMMENDED RULES FOR SIZING THE 
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix B 
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON COMBINATION 
WASTE AND VENT SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
 
Appendix C 
ALTERNATE PLUMBING SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix D 
SIZING STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix E 
MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOME PARKS AND 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix F 
FIREFIGHTER BREATHING AIR 
REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS 

--- Page 17 ---
Page | 17 
 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
 
Appendix G 
SIZING OF VENTING SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
 
Appendix H 
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
 
Appendix I 
INSTALLATION STANDARD 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix J 
COMBINATION OF INDOOR AND OUTDOOR 
COMBUSTION AND VENTILATION OPENING 
DESIGN 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix K 
POTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix L 
SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES 

--- Page 18 ---
Page | 18 
 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix M 
PEAK WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 
Appendix N 
IMPACT OF WATER TEMPERATURE ON THE 
POTENTIAL FOR SCALDING AND LEGIONELLA 
GROWTH 
No San Francisco Plumbing Code Amendments. 
 