--- Page 1 ---
~ 1 ~ 
 
2025 
San Francisco Green Building Code 
 
Amendments to the 
 
2025 California Green Building Standards Code 
(CALGreen) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operative date: January 1, 2026 
  

--- Page 2 ---
~ 2 ~ 
 
 
 
Text Format: 
   
 
   Unchanged language from the 2025 California Code is shaded, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
   San Francisco amendments are printed in unformatted ("plain") text, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
[ ← ]   An arrow represents the location of language that has been deleted by San Francisco from 
the 2025 California Code. 
   A solid line represents a change from the original published edition of the 2025 San Francisco 
Green Building Code. 
 
Chapter 1 
 
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101 – GENERAL 
101.1 Revise this section as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the [ ← ] San Francisco Green 
Building [ ← ]  Code, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this 
code”. [ ← ]  The [ ← ] San Francisco Green Building [ ← ]  Code is Part 11 of thirteen parts of 
the official compilation and publication of the adoption, amendment and repeal of building 
regulations to the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, [ ← ] and Chapter 13C of San 
Francisco Building Inspection Commission Amendments to the California Building Standards 
Code. 
101.2 Revise this section as follows: 
101.2 Purpose. The purpose of this [ ← ] chapter is to promote the health, safety and general 
welfare of San Francisco residents, workers, and visitors by [ ← ] minimizing waste of energy, 
water, and other resources in the construction and operation of buildings in the City and County 
of San Francisco and by providing a healthy indoor environment. The green building practices 
required by this chapter will also further the goal of reducing the greenhouse gas emissions in the 
City and County of San Francisco to 61 percent below 1990 levels by the year 2030, as stated in 
San Francisco Environment Code Chapter 9. 
101.3 Revise this section as follows: 
101.3 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the planning, design, operation, 
construction, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure, unless 
otherwise indicated in this code, as well as alterations to existing buildings throughout [ ← ] the 
City and County of San Francisco. 
   While [ ← ]  this code  [ ← ]  references green building programs, the City and County of San 
Francisco does not confer certification  [ ← ]  under any green building program. 
101.3.1 Revise this section as follows: 
101.3.1 [ ← ]  Regulated buildings, structures and applications. Provisions of this code shall 
apply to the following buildings, structures, and applications regulated by state agencies as 
specified in Sections 103 through 106 [ ← ] of California Green Building Standards Code Title 

--- Page 3 ---
~ 3 ~ 
 
24 Part 11, modified by local ordinance with supplemental requirements applicable to occupancy 
types A, B, I, M, E and R as defined by California Building Code Title 24 Section 302 (2022 
2025) as amended pursuant to Section 101.7. When adopted by a state agency, the provisions of 
this code shall be enforced by the appropriate enforcing agency, but only to the extent of 
authority granted to such agency by statute. 
101.4 Revise this section as follows: 
101.4 Appendices. [ ← ] [Reserved] 
101.6 Revise this section as follows: 
101.6.1 Differences. In the event of any differences between these building standards and the 
standard reference documents, the text of [ ← ] this Chapter shall govern. 
101.6.3 Revise this section as follows: 
101.6.3 Conflicts. When the requirements of this code conflict with the requirements of any 
other part of the California Building Standards Code, Title 24, any provision contained 
elsewhere in the San Francisco Municipal Code, or any regulation or requirement adopted by the 
Public Utilities Commission or other City agency under its Charter authority, the most restrictive 
requirement shall prevail. 
101.7 Revise this section as follows: 
101.7 City [ ← ]  and county amendments, additions [ ← ]  and deletions. This code includes 
the amendments, deletions, and additions to California green building requirements which 
maintain stricter local green building standards. 
101.10 Revise this section as follows: 
101.10 [ ← ]  Equivalency. Wherever reference is made to the LEED® or GreenPoint Rated 
systems, a comparable equivalent rating system may be used if approved by the Director. The 
applicable LEED®, GreenPoint Rated or equivalent versions of performance standards for 
applications subject to this chapter are: 
LEED v4 for Interior Design and Construction (LEED v4 ID+C) 
LEED v4 for Building Design and Construction (LEED v4 BD+C) 
LEED v4 for Homes Design and Construction 
GreenPoint Rated (GPR) Single Family New Home Construction – 9.0 10.0 or current 
GreenPoint Rated (GPR) Multifamily New Home Construction – 9.0 or current 
GreenPoint Rated (GPR) Existing Multifamily –v1.0 2.0 or current 
   Wherever specific LEED prerequisites or credits are cited, such references are to LEED v4 
BD+C. More recent LEED and GreenPoint Rated versions may be used, provided the credits and 
points achieved are as or at least as stringent as LEED v4 BD+C or GPR v9.0 10.0. 
   Wherever the LEED or GreenPoint Rated systems include a minimum energy or other 
performance requirement, the permit applicant may choose to meet the minimum performance 
requirements with an alternative equivalent method approved by the Director. 
   Compliance with any of these requirements may be verified and/or certified by any means, 
including third-party review or equivalent requirements verified via other rating systems, as 
approved by the Director. 
101.11 Revise this section as follows: 
101.11 Effective use of this code. The following steps shall be used to establish which 
provisions of this code are applicable to a specific occupancy: 
   1.   Establish the type of occupancy. 
 [ ← ]     2.   Find the section which covers the established occupancy. 
   3.   Identify the minimum requirements of this code for the [ ← ]  established occupancy in 
Sections 4 and 5. 

--- Page 4 ---
~ 4 ~ 
 
 [ ← ]     4.   Administrative Bulletin 93, provided by the Department of Building Inspection, 
summarizes how the requirements of San Francisco Green Building Code and relevant local 
requirements may be met. Appendices to Administrative Bulletin 93 include tabular summaries 
of required measures, and provide submittal forms. 
 
Chapter 2 
 
DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 202 – DEFINITIONS 
202 Add and amend the following definitions: 
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SPACE (EV Space). A space intended for future 
installation of EV charging equipment and charging of electric vehicles. The EV Space need not 
be reserved exclusively for electric vehicle charging. 
   ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION (EVCS). One or more electric vehicle 
charging spaces served by electric vehicle charger(s) or other charging equipment allowing 
charging of electric vehicles. For purposes of determining compliance with accessibility 
requirements, when the permitted length of time a vehicle may occupy an electric vehicle 
charging station differs from the permitted duration of stay in publicly accessible parking spaces 
in the same parking area, electric vehicle charging stations are not considered parking 
spaces. When the permitted duration of stay in a space served by electric vehicle charger(s) is the 
same as other publicly accessible parking spaces in the same parking area, EVCS may be 
considered parking spaces. The EVCS need not be reserved exclusively for electric vehicle 
charging. 
   GREENPOINT RATED, GREENPOINTS and GREENPOINTS CHECKLIST. The 
residential green building rating system and checklist and certification methodology of the non-
profit organization Build It Green. 
   HISTORICAL RESOURCE. A property that meets the terms of the definitions in Section 
21084.1 of the CEQA Statute (The California Environmental Quality Act [Public Resources 
Code Section 21084.1]) and Section 15064.5 of the CEQA Guidelines, as determined by the San 
Francisco Planning Department. 
   LARGE COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A commercial building or addition of Group B, M, A, 
I, or E, occupancy that is 25,000 gross square feet or more. 
   LEED® and LEED® CHECKLIST. The Leadership in Energy and Environment Design 
rating system, certification methodology, and checklist of the United States Green Building 
Council (USGBC). 
   MAJOR ALTERATIONS. Alterations and additions where interior finishes are removed and 
significant upgrades to structural and mechanical, electrical, and/or plumbing systems are 
proposed where areas of such construction are 25,000 gross square feet or more in Group B, M, 
or R occupancies of existing buildings. 
   MIXED-FUEL BUILDING. A building that uses natural gas or propane as fuel for space 
heating, water heating (including pools and spas), cooking appliances or clothes drying 
appliances, or is plumbed for such equipment. 

--- Page 5 ---
~ 5 ~ 
 
   NEW LARGE COMMERCIAL INTERIORS. First-time tenant improvements where areas of 
such construction are over 25,000 gross square feet or more in Group B or M occupancy areas of 
existing buildings. 
   NEWLY CONSTRUCTED (or NEW CONSTRUCTION). A newly constructed building (or 
new construction) is a building that has never before been used or occupied for any purpose 
and does not include additions, alterations or repairs.     
   TOTAL ENERGY DESIGN RATING. A metric required by the California Energy 
Commission to be applied to low-rise residential construction in order to comply with California 
Title 24 Part 6 Energy Standards. The Total Energy Design Rating has two components: (a) the 
Energy Efficiency Design Rating; and (b) the Solar Electric Generation and Demand Flexibility 
Design Rating. The Solar Electric Generation and Demand Flexibility Design Rating is 
subtracted from the Energy Efficiency Design Rating to determine the Total Energy Design 
Rating. California Energy Standards require that each building must separately comply with the 
Energy Efficiency Design Rating and the Total Energy Design Rating. 
 
RESIDENTIAL LONG-TERM BICYCLE PARKING. [HCD] A secure locker, weather 
protected enclosure, or storage room that provides bicycle parking for more than twelve hours 
that allows individual locking of bicycles to a permanently anchored parking device or rack. 
 
RESIDENTIAL SHORT-TERM BICYCLE PARKING. [HCD] A permanently anchored 
bicycle parking device, rack or lockers, in an unsheltered, open area, that provides bicycle 
parking for twelve hours or less that allows individual locking of bicycles to the parking device 
or rack. 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
GREEN BUILDING 
SECTION 301 – GENERAL 
301.1 Revise this section as follows: 
301.1 Scope. Buildings in the City and County of San Francisco shall be designed to include the 
green building measures specified as mandatory [ ← ] under the California Green Building 
Standards Code (CalGreen). 
   Additional green building requirements established by the City and County of San Francisco 
are mandatory for: 
   (1)   Newly constructed Group R occupancy buildings, 
   (2)   Newly constructed buildings of Group B, M, A, and I occupancies that are 25,000 gross 
square feet or more, 
   (3)   New first-time build-outs of commercial interiors that are 25,000 gross square feet or 
more in buildings of Group B or M occupancies, and 

--- Page 6 ---
~ 6 ~ 
 
   (4)   Major alterations that are 25,000 gross square feet or more in existing buildings of Group 
B, M or R occupancies, where interior finishes are removed and significant upgrades to structural 
and mechanical, electrical and/or plumbing systems are proposed. 
SECTION 302 – MIXED OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS 
302.1 Revise this section as follows: 
302.1 Mixed Occupancy Buildings. In mixed occupancy buildings, each portion of a building 
shall comply with the specific [ ← ]  measures applicable to each specific occupancy as required 
by California Code of Regulations Title 24 Part 11 and the San Francisco Green Building Code. 
However, to fulfill any requirements of San Francisco Green Building Code Sections 4.103 
through 4.105 and 5.103 through 5.105, as applicable, the project sponsor may apply a single 
required green building standard tothe entire building. 
   Exceptions: 
      1.   [HCD] Accessory structures and accessory occupancies serving residential buildings 
shall comply with Chapter 4 and Appendix A4, as applicable. 
      2.   [HCD] For the purposes of CALGreen, live/work units, complying with Section 419 of 
the California Building Code, shall not be considered mixed occupancies. Live/work units shall 
comply with Chapter 4 and Appendix A4, as applicable. 
SECTION 303 – PHASED PROJECTS 
303.1.1.1 Add the following section: 
303.1.1.1 Maintenance of required features. Any structure subject to this chapter shall 
maintain the green building features required herein, or equivalent, regardless of subsequent 
alterations, additions, or changes of use, unless subject to subsequent or more stringent 
requirements. 
304 Modify the following section: 
SECTION 304 – VOLUNTARY TIERS 
 [ ← ]  This section not applicable in San Francisco. 
305 Modify the following section: 
SECTION 305 [OSHPD 1] – CALGREEN TIER 1 AND 
CALGREEN TIER 2 
 [ ← ]  This section not applicable in San Francisco. 
306 Modify the following section: 
SECTION 306  [ ← ]  – VOLUNTARY MEASURES 
 [ ← ]  This section not applicable in San Francisco. 
Chapter 4 
RESIDENTIAL MANDATORY MEASURES 

--- Page 7 ---
~ 7 ~ 
 
Division 4.1 
 
PLANNING AND DESIGN 
SECTION 4.101 – GENERAL 
4101.1 Revise the section as follows: 
4.101.1 Scope. The provisions of this division outline planning, design and development 
methods that include environmentally responsible site selection, building design, building siting 
and development to protect, restore and enhance the environmental quality of the 
site, [ ← ]  respect the integrity of adjacent properties and promote the health, safety and welfare 
of San Francisco residents. 
4.103 Replace this section as follows: 
 [ ← ] SECTION 4.103 – REQUIREMENTS FOR GROUP R 
OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS 
4.103.1 New low-rise residential buildings. 
4.103.1.1 Rating requirements 
   New residential buildings must be GreenPoint Rated and applicants must submit 
documentation demonstrating that a minimum of 75 GreenPoints from the GreenPoints Single 
Family New Construction Checklist or the GreenPoints Multifamily New Construction Checklist 
will be achieved. Alternatively, this rating requirement may be met by obtaining LEED Silver 
certification. 
4.103.1.2 Stormwater management 
   Projects subject to this section shall meet the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission 
stormwater management requirements. 
4.103.2 New high-rise residential buildings 
4.103.2.1 Rating requirement 
   Permit applicants must submit documentation to achieve LEED® “Silver” certification. 
Alternatively, this rating requirement may be met by obtaining the GreenPoint Rated designation 
and submitting documentation demonstrating that a minimum of 75 GreenPoints from the 
GreenPoint Rated Multifamily New Construction checklist will be achieved. 
4.103.2.2 [Reserved] 
4.103.2.3 Construction debris management. Permit applicants must submit documentation 
verifying the diversion of a minimum 75 percent of the projects construction and demolition 
debris. The waste management plan necessary to meet this requirement shall be updated as 
necessary and shall be accessible during construction for examination by the Department of 
Building Inspection. Permit applicants must also meet the requirements of San Francisco 
Environment Code Chapter 14 and San Francisco Building Code Chapter 13B (Construction and 
Demolition Debris Recovery Program.) 
4.103.2.4 Stormwater management. Projects subject to this section shall meet the San 
Francisco Public Utilities Commission stormwater management requirements. 
4.103.2.4.1 Construction activity stormwater pollution prevention. All projects, whether 
greater or lesser than one acre, must develop and implement construction activity pollution 
prevention and site run-off controls adopted by the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission. 
4.103.3 Major Alterations to Existing Group R Occupancy Buildings. 

--- Page 8 ---
~ 8 ~ 
 
4.103.3.1 Rating Requirement. 
   Permit applicants must submit documentation to achieve a LEED® Silver rating. Alternatively, 
this rating requirement may be met by obtaining the GreenPoint Rated designation and 
submitting documentation demonstrating that a minimum of 75 GreenPoints from the 
GreenPoint Rated Multifamily checklist will be achieved. Major alterations applying to less than 
80% of the building’s gross floor area may alternately submit documentation demonstrating that 
49 points from the GreenPoint Rated Existing Multifamily checklist have been achieved within 
the project area. 
4.103.3.2 Low-Emitting Materials. 
   Alterations utilizing LEED must submit documentation verifying that low-emitting materials 
are used, subject to on-site verification, meeting at least the following categories of materials 
covered under LEED EQ Credit Low-Emitting Materials wherever applicable: interior paints and 
coatings applied on-site, interior sealants and adhesives applied on site, flooring, and composite 
wood. 
   Alterations utilizing GreenPoint Rated must submit documentation to verify the use of low-
emitting materials meeting the GreenPoint Rated Multifamily New Homes measures for low-
emitting coatings, adhesives and sealants, and carpet systems. 
4.104 Replace this section as follows: 
SECTION 4.104 – [ ← ] HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
4.104.1 On-site retention of historical features. For alterations of buildings determined to be 
historical resources, after demonstrating compliance with all applicable codes, including the 
2022 California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, Part 6) and the 2022 California 
Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8), the minimum points or credits required under this 
chapter shall be reduced for retention and in-situ reuse or restoration of certain character defining 
features, as described in Table 4.104A. Retention includes the rehabilitation and repair of 
character-defining features that conform to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties. 
TABLE 4.104.A 
SIGNIFICANT HISTORICAL 
ARCHITECTURAL 
FEATURES 
PERCENT 
RETAINED* 
ADJUSTMENT 
TO MINIMUM 
LEED POINT 
REQUIREMENT 
ADJUSTMENT TO 
MINIMUM 
GREENPOINTS 
REQUIREMENT 
Windows @ principal façade(s) 100% 4 15 
Other windows At least 50% 1 3 
Other windows 100% 2 6 
Exterior doors @ principal 
façade(s) 
100% 1 3 
Siding or wall finish @ principal 
façade(s) 
100% 1 4 
Trim & casing @ wall openings 
on principal façade(s) 
100% 1 3 
Roof cornices or decorative eaves 
visible from right-of-way 
100% 1 3 

--- Page 9 ---
~ 9 ~ 
 
Sub-cornices, belt courses, water 
tables, and running trim visible 
from right-of-way 
100% 1 3 
Character-defining elements of 
significant interior spaces 
100% 4 15 
Other exterior ornamentation (e.g. 
cartouches, corbels, quoins, etc.) 
visible from right-of-way 
80% 1 3 
  
4.104.2. Adjustment to Green Credit for Retention of Historic Features. Where the historical 
resource is a portion of the total project, the LEED or GreenPoint Rated requirement shall be 
adjusted to equal the percentage of gross floor area of the historical resource compared to the 
total project gross floor area. 
4.105 Replace this section as follows: 
SECTION 4.105 – [ ← ] DEMOLITION OF EXISTING 
STRUCTURES 
4.105.1 Adjustments to Rating Requirements for Building Demolition and 
Density. Applications subject to the San Francisco Green Building Code, whereby construction 
of a new building is proposed within five years of the demolition of a building on the site, where 
such demolition occurred after the effective date of the Green Building Ordinance - November 3, 
2008 - the sustainability requirements for new buildings pursuant to the San Francisco Green 
Building Code shall be increased as follows: 
4.105.1.1 LEED® Projects. For projects attaining a LEED® certification: 
   (1)   Where the building demolished was an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 10 points. 
   (2)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 6 additional points. 
   (3)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource and the number of 
dwellings in the residential portion of the replacement structure are tripled, the required points 
shall be increased by 5 additional points. 
4.105.1.2 GreenPoint Rated Projects. For projects attaining GreenPoint Rated: 
   (1)   Where the building demolished was an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 25 additional points. 
   (2)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 20 additional points. 
   (3)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource and the number of 
dwellings in the residential portion of the replacement structure are tripled, the required points 
shall be increased by 17 additional points. 
SECTION 4.106 – SITE DEVELOPMENT 
4.106.4 Revise this section as follows: 
4.106.4 Electric vehicle (EV) charging for new construction. New construction shall comply 
with Section 4.106.4.1 or 4.106.4.2 to facilitate future installation and use of EV chargers. 
Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) shall be installed in accordance with the California 
Electrical Code, Article 625. 

--- Page 10 ---
~ 10 ~ 
 
   Exceptions: 
      1.   On a case-by-case basis, where the local enforcing agency has determined EV charging 
and infrastructure are not feasible based upon one or more of the following conditions: 
         1.1   Where there is no local utility power supply or the local utility is unable to supply 
adequate power. 
         1.2   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcing agency substantiating that 
additional local utility infrastructure design requirements, directly related to the implementation 
of Section 4.106.4,  [ ← ]  increase the utility side cost to the homeowner or the developer by 
more than $400 per parking space. In such cases, buildings subject to Section 4.106.4 shall 
maximize the number of EV Charging Spaces, up to a utility side cost of a maximum of $400 per 
space. Cost shall be determined by dividing the increase in local utility infrastructure cost 
attributable to compliance with this section by the sum of parking spaces and EV Charging 
Spaces. 
      2.   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (JADU) without 
additional parking facilities. 
4.106.4.1 New one-and-two-family dwellings and townhouses with attached or 
adjacent private garages. [ ← ] For each parking space, install a 40-Amp 208 or 240-volt 
branch circuit, including raceway, electrical panel capacity, overprotection devices, wire, and 
termination point such as a receptacle. The termination point shall be in close proximity to the 
proposed EV charger location. Raceways are required to be continuous at enclosed, inaccessible, 
or concealed areas and spaces. Raceway for each circuit shall not be less than trade size 1 
(nominal 1-inch inside diameter). 
4.106.4.1.1 Identification. The service panel or subpanel circuit directory shall identify the 
overcurrent protective device space(s) reserved for future EV charging as [ ← ] “EV READY” 
for full circuits. The raceway termination location shall be permanently and visibly marked 
as [ ← ] “EV READY” for full circuits. 
4.106.4.2.2.1.2 Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) dimensions. The charging spaces 
shall be designed to comply with the following: 
   1.   The minimum length of each EV space shall be 18 feet (5486 mm). 
   2.   The minimum width of each EV space shall be 9 feet (2743 mm). 
   3.   One in every 25 charging spaces, but not less than one, shall also have an 8-foot (2438 mm) 
wide minimum aisle. A 5-foot (1524 mm) wide minimum aisle shall be permitted provided the 
minimum width of the EV space is 12 feet (3658 mm). 
      a.   Surface slope for this EV space and the aisle shall not exceed 1 unit vertical in 48 units 
horizontal (2.083 percent slope) in any direction. 
      b.   Notwithstanding any other applicable requirements, when an EV charger is installed 
serving an accessible parking space, the space may be considered a parking space if the duration 
of stay is not subject to any limitations different from those generally applied to other publicly 
accessible parking spaces in the same parking area. If the duration of stay in an accessible space 
equipped with an EV charger is subject to limitations different from those generally applied to 
other publicly accessible parking spaces in the same parking area, the space is not a parking 
space. 
4.106.4.2.2.1.3 Accessible EV spaces. In addition to the requirements in Sections 4.106.4.2.2.1.1 
and 4.106.4.2.2.1.2, all EVSE, when installed, shall comply with the accessibility provisions for 
EV chargers in the California Building Code, Chapter 11B. EV ready spaces and EVCS in 
multifamily developments shall comply with California Building Code, Chapter 11A, Section 

--- Page 11 ---
~ 11 ~ 
 
1109A. Accessible spaces must meet the dimensions specified in Section 4.106 .4.2.2.1.2, 
Planning Code Section 154, or other applicable accessibility requirements, whichever would 
result in the largest space size. 
4.106.4.2.3 EV space requirements. 
   1.   Single EV space required. [ ← ] Where a single EV space is required, install a full 
circuit with a minimum of 40-Amp 208 or 240 Volt capacity, including listed raceway, sufficient 
electrical panel capacity, overcurrent protection devices, wire, and termination point such as a 
receptacle. The termination point shall be in close proximity to the proposed EV charger 
location. The raceway shall not be less than trade size 1 (nominal 1-inch inside diameter). 
   2.   Multiple EV spaces required. Construction documents shall indicate the raceway 
termination point and the location of installed or future EV spaces, receptacles, or EV chargers. 
Construction documents shall also provide information on amperage of installed or future 
receptacles or EVSE, raceway method(s), wiring schematics and electrical load calculations. 
Plan design shall be based upon a 40-ampere minimum branch circuit. Required raceways and 
related components that are planned to be installed underground, enclosed, inaccessible or in 
concealed areas and spaces shall be installed at the time of original construction. 
   Exception: A raceway is not required if a minimum 40-ampere 208/240-volt dedicated EV 
branch circuit is installed in close proximity to the location or the proposed location of the EV 
space at the time of original construction in accordance with the California Electrical Code. 
      a.   Multiple Levels of Parking: 
         i.   Branch circuit panelboard(s) shall be installed at each parking level with service 
capacity dedicated to EV Capable Spaces and EV spaces proportional to the number of vehicle 
spaces on each level, including panelboard(s) space and capacity. The circuits and overcurrent 
protective devices shall remain reserved exclusively for EV charging. 
         Exception: Circuits and overcurrent protective devices in panelboards not located on the 
same level may contribute to the requirements of 4.106.4.2.4(b), provided the circuits are 
reserved exclusively for EV charging. For example, the circuit serving an EV Space dedicated to 
a condominium owner may connect to the electrical panelboard of the corresponding 
condominium. 
         ii.   Install raceway or sleeves where penetrations to walls, floors, or other partitions will be 
necessary to install panels, raceways, or related electrical components necessary per site 
conditions for future installation of branch circuits. All such penetrations must comply with 
applicable codes, including but not limited to the San Francisco Electrical Code and the San 
Francisco Fire Code. 
   NOTES: 
   Electric vehicle charging infrastructure and housing are critical priorities for the City and 
County of San Francisco. Automated Load Management Systems, energy efficiency, and 
selection of low-amperage technologies can help mitigate increases to peak electric load. Where 
the installation of a utility electrical transformer may be determined to be necessary in the 
context of compliance with Section 4.106.4.2.4 of this chapter, SF Building Code 
Section 106A.1.17.1, or other provisions of the San Francisco Electrical Code, and where such 
transformer cannot be accommodated on the project site due to the combination of project site 
dimensions, San Francisco Building Code, San Francisco Electrical Code, and applicable utility 
regulations, the Director of Public Works is encouraged to issue a Sidewalk Vault Encroachment 
Permit, provided that the fronting property owner complies with all requirements governing 


--- Page 12 ---
~ 12 ~ 
 
street occupancy, including but not limited to the San Francisco Public Works Code and 
Department of Public Works Order 165,553. 
4.106.4.2.4 Identification. The service panel or subpanel circuit directory shall identify the 
overcurrent protective device space(s) reserved for future EV charging purposes as “EVSE 
READY” for full circuits and otherwise “EVSE CAPABLE” in accordance with the California 
Electrical Code. 
Division 4.2 
 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
SECTION 4.201 – GENERAL 
4.201 Add the following section: 
4.201.2. Better roofs. 
   (a)   Newly constructed Group R occupancy buildings are required by California Title 24 Part 6 
Energy Standards to install photovoltaic (PV) energy systems. For newly constructed 
multifamily buildings the minimum size of such systems is required by Section 170.2(f) and 
170.2(g) to be not less than the smaller of PV system size determined by Equation 170.2-C or 
Equation 170.2-D, or the total of all Solar Access Roof Area (SARA) multiplied by 14 W/ft2. 
Projects that constitute a Large Development Project or Small Development Project under the 
Stormwater Management Ordinance (Public Works Code secs 147-147.6) may exclude from 
SARA any roof area where both: 
      (1)   The area is occupied by living roof, meaning the area of media for growing plants, and 
      (2)   The area occupied by living roof contributes to determination of compliance with the 
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as documented by a Preliminary Stormwater Control Plan 
or a Modified Compliance Application submitted to the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission. 
   (b)   In any final Stormwater Control Plan approved by the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission, including where such approval may occur subsequent to addenda to a Site Permit 
wherein compliance with California Title 24 Part 6 Energy Standards is documented, the 
applicant shall ensure the area occupied by living roof contributing to determination of 
compliance with the Stormwater Management Ordinance is no less than the square footage 
approved for exclusion from SARA. 
4.201.3 Energy Performance. 
   (a)   All-electric buildings. A newly constructed residential all-electric building shall be 
designed and constructed such that the Energy Budget for the proposed building is no greater 
than the corresponding Energy Budget for a Standard Design Building compliant with California 
Title 24 Part 6 Energy Standards. 
   (b)   Mixed-fuel residential buildings. A newly constructed mixed-fuel residential building 
shall be designed and constructed such that the Energy Budget is no greater than 90% of the Title 
24 Part 6 Energy Budget for the Standard Design Building as calculated by compliance software 
approved by the California Energy Commission. 
 

--- Page 13 ---
~ 13 ~ 
 
Chapter 5 
 
NONRESIDENTIAL MANDATORY MEASURES 
Division 5.1 
 
PLANNING AND DESIGN 
SECTION 5.101 – GENERAL 
5.101.1 Modify the section as follows: 
5.101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter outline planning, design and development methods 
that include environmentally responsible site selection, building design, building siting and 
development to protect, restore, and enhance the environmental quality of the site, [ ← ]  respect 
the integrity of adjacent properties, and promote the health, safety and welfare of San Francisco 
residents. 
5.103 Replace this section as follows: 
SECTION 5.103  [ ← ]  – REQUIREMENTS FOR GROUP A, B, I, 
E and M BUILDINGS 
5.103.1 New large commercial buildings. 
5.103.1 New large commercial buildings. 
5.103.1.1 Rating requirement. Permit applicants must submit documentation to achieve LEED 
“Gold” certification. 
5.103.1.2 Indoor water use reduction. Permit applicants must submit documentation verifying 
that project meets maximum prescriptive fixture flow rates in accordance with the California 
Plumbing Code. The project must also achieve the LEED WE Prerequisite Indoor Water Use 
Reduction (WEp2) and a minimum 30 percent reduction in the use of indoor potable water, as 
calculated to meet the LEED WE credit Indoor Water Use Reduction (WEc2). 
5.103.1.3 Construction waste management. Permit applicants must submit documentation 
verifying the diversion of a minimum 75 percent of the project’s construction and demolition 
waste, as calculated to meet LEED MR Prerequisite Construction and Demolition Waste 
Management Planning and LEED MR Credit Construction and Demolition Waste Management. 
Permit applicants must also meet the requirements of San Francisco Environment Code Chapter 
14 and San Francisco Building Code Chapter 13B (Construction and Demolition Debris 
Recovery Program). The waste management plan necessary to meet this requirement shall be 
updated as necessary and shall be accessible during construction for examination by the 
Department of Building Inspection. 
5.103.1.4 Commissioning. Permit applicants must submit documentation verifying that the 
facility has been or will meet the criteria necessary to achieve CALGreen section 5.410.2 and 
Option 1 of LEED EA credit (Enhanced Commissioning), in addition to LEED EA Prerequisite 
(Fundamental Commissioning) and Verification. 
5.103.1.6 Stormwater management. Projects subject to this section shall meet the San 
Francisco Public Utilities Commission stormwater management requirements. All new building 

--- Page 14 ---
~ 14 ~ 
 
projects must develop and implement an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or Stormwater 
Pollution Prevention Plan and implement site run-off controls adopted by the San Francisco 
Public Utilities Commission as applicable. 
5.103.1.7 Energy performance. [Reserved] 
5.103.1.8 Temporary ventilation and IAQ management during construction. Permit 
applicants must submit documentation verifying that an Indoor Air Quality Management Plan is 
prepared and implemented which meets LEED EQ Credit Construction Indoor Air Quality 
Management and Title 24 Part 11 Sections 5.504.1 and 5.504.3. 
5.103.1.9 Low-Emitting Materials. Permit applicants must submit documentation verifying that 
low-emitting materials are used, subject to on-site verification, meeting at least the following 
categories of materials covered under LEED EQ Credit Low-Emitting Materials wherever 
applicable: interior paints and coatings applied on-site, interior sealants and adhesives applied on 
site, flooring, and composite wood. 
5.103.1.10 CALGreen mandatory measures. The following measures are mandatory in 
California for new non-residential buildings. Optionally, similar LEED credits can be used as 
alternative compliance paths, as noted below: 
  
Title 24 Part 11 Section(s) Topic/Requirement Alternate Compliance Option: 
5.106.8 Light pollution 
reduction 
Meet LEED SS Credit Light Pollution Reduction 
5.508.1.2 Halons not allowed 
in HVAC, 
refrigeration and 
fire suppression 
equipment. 
Meet LEED EA Credit Enhanced Refrigerant 
Management, and additionally document that all 
HVAC&R systems do not contain CFCs or halons. 
 
5.103.3 Major alterations to existing non-residential buildings. 
5.103.3.1 Rating requirement. Permit applicants must submit documentation to achieve LEED 
“Gold” certification. 
5.103.3.2 Low emitting materials. Permit applicants must submit documentation verifying that 
low-emitting materials are used, subject to in-site verification, meeting at least the following 
categories of materials covered under LEED EQ Credit Low-Emitting Materials: interior paints 
and coatings applied on-site, interior sealants and adhesives applied on site, flooring, and 
composite wood. 
5.103.3.3 Electric vehicle charging. Section 5.106.5.3 of this chapter shall apply to major 
alterations and newly-constructed parking facilities associated with existing Group A, B, I, and 
M occupancy buildings where electrical service to the building will be upgraded. In major 
alterations where existing electrical service will not be upgraded, all requirements under Section 
5.106.5 shall apply to the maximum extent that: 
   (1)   does not require upgrade to existing service; and 
   (2)   the Director does not determine that compliance with Section 5.106.5.3.3 and Title 24 
Chapter 11B, if applicable, is technically infeasible, as defined in California Building Code 
Chapter 2, Section 202. 
5.103.4 New large commercial interiors. 

--- Page 15 ---
~ 15 ~ 
 
5.103.4.1 Rating requirement. Permit applicants must submit documentation to achieve LEED 
“Gold” certification. 
5.103.4.2 Low emitting materials. Permit applicants must submit documentation verifying that 
low-emitting materials are used, subject to in-site verification, meeting at least the following 
categories of materials covered under LEED EQ Credit Low-Emitting Materials: interior paints 
and coatings applied on-site, interior sealants and adhesives applied on site, flooring, and 
composite wood. 
5.104 Replace this section as follows: 
SECTION 5.104  [ ← ]  – HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
5.104.1 On-site Retention of Historical Features. For alterations of buildings determined to be 
historical resources, after demonstrating compliance with all applicable codes, including the 
2022 California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, Part 6) and the 2022 California 
Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8), the minimum points or credits required under this 
chapter shall be reduced for retention and in-situ reuse or restoration of certain character defining 
features, as described in Table 5.104A. Retention includes the rehabilitation and repair of 
character-defining features that conform to the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the 
Treatment of Historic Properties. 
 
TABLE 5.104.A 
SIGNIFICANT HISTORICAL 
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES 
PERCENT 
RETAINED* 
ADJUSTMENT TO 
MINIMUM LEED POINT 
REQUIREMENT 
ADJUSTMENT TO MINIMUM 
GREENPOINTS 
REQUIREMENT 
Windows @ principal 
façade(s) 100% 4 15 
Other windows At least 50% 1 3 
Other windows 100% 2 6 
Exterior doors @ principal 
façade(s) 100% 1 3 
Siding or wall finish @ 
principal façade(s) 100% 1 4 
Trim & casing @ wall 
openings on principal 
façade(s) 
100% 1 3 
Roof cornices or decorative 
eaves visible from right-of-
way 
100% 1 3 
Sub-cornices, belt courses, 
water tables, and running 
trim visible from right-of-
way 
100% 1 3 
Character-defining elements 
of significant interior spaces 100% 4 15 
Other exterior 
ornamentation (e.g. 
cartouches, corbels, quoins, 
80% 1 3 

--- Page 16 ---
~ 16 ~ 
 
etc.) visible from right-of-
way 
  
5.104.2. Adjustment to Green Credit for Retention of Historic Features. Where the historical 
resource is a portion of the total project, the LEED or GreenPoint Rated point requirement shall 
be adjusted to equal the percentage of gross floor area of the historical resource compared to the 
total project gross floor area. 
5.105 Replace this section as follows: 
SECTION 5.105 –  [ ← ]  DEMOLITION OF EXISTING 
STRUCTURES 
5.105.1 Adjustments to rating requirements. Applications subject to the San Francisco Green 
Building Code, whereby construction of a new building is proposed within five years of the 
demolition of a building on the site, where such demolition occurred after November 3, 2008, the 
sustainability requirements for new buildings pursuant to the San Francisco Green Building Code 
shall be increased as follows: 
5.105.1.1 LEED® projects. For projects attaining a LEED® certification: 
   (1)   Where the building demolished was an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 10 points, which is 10% of the total available in the LEED® rating system, absent 
demolition. 
   (2)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 6 additional points, which is 10% of the maximum total required points under this 
chapter, absent demolition. 
   (3)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource and the number of 
dwellings in the residential portion of the replacement structure are tripled, the required points 
shall be increased by 5 additional points, which is 8% of the maximum total required points 
under this chapter, absent demolition. 
5.105.1.2 GreenPoint rated projects. For projects attaining GreenPoint Rated: 
   (1)   Where the building demolished was an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 25 additional points. 
   (2)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource, the required points shall be 
increased by 20 additional points. 
   (3)   Where the building demolished was not an historical resource and the number of 
dwellings in the residential portion of the replacement structure are tripled, the required points 
shall be increased by 17 additional points. 
SECTION 5.106 – SITE DEVELOPMENT 
5.106.5.3 Revise this section as follows: 
5.106.5.3 Revise this section as follows: 
5.106.5.3 Electric vehicle (EV) charging. [N] Construction to provide electric vehicle 
infrastructure and facilitate electric vehicle charging shall comply with Section 5.106.5.3.1 EV 
capable spaces, Section 5.106.5.3.2 Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS)-Power allocation 
method and associated Table 5.106.5.3.6, and shall be provided in accordance with regulations in 
the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code. 
   Exceptions: (Relocated from 2019 CALGreen Section 5.106.5.3.3 and edited) 

--- Page 17 ---
~ 17 ~ 
 
   1.   On a case-by-case basis where the local enforcing agency has determined compliance with 
this section is not feasible based upon one of the following conditions: 
      a.   Where there is no local utility power supply. 
      b.   Where the local utility is unable to supply adequate power. 
      c.   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcement agency substantiating that 
additional local utility infrastructure design requirements, directly related to the implementation 
of Section 5.106.5.3, may adversely impact the construction cost of the project. 
   2.   [ ← ]  Areas of parking facilities served by parking lifts, including but not limited to, 
automated mechanical-access open parking garages as defined in the California Building Code; or 
parking facilities otherwise incapable of supporting electric vehicle charging. 
   3.    In major alterations, where there is evidence substantiating that meeting the requirements 
of this section present an unreasonable hardship or are technically infeasible, the Director may 
upon request from the project sponsor consider an appeal to reduce the number of EV Spaces 
required.  
 
TABLE 5.106.5.3.1 
TOTAL NUMBER OF 
ACTUAL PARKING 
SPACES 
NUMBER OF 
REQUIRED EV 
CAPABLE SPACES 
Other than Office and Retail  
 
NUMBER OF REQUIRED 
EVCS [ ← ]  2 3 
     Office and Retail 
 
   NUMBER OF 
REQUIRED EVCS 2,3 
1-41-9 2 01 2 
10-25 5 23 4 
26-50 11 46 8 
51-75 19 510 14 
76-100 26 913 20 
101-150 38 1319 29 
151-200 53 1827 40 
201 and over [ ← ]30 percent of 
total 1 
[ ← ] 33 50 percent of EV 
capable spaces 1 
75 percent of EV 
capable spaces1 
1.   Calculation for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
2.   [ ← ]Each EVSE shall reduce the number of required EV capable spaces by the same number.  
3. At least one Level 2 EVSE shall be provided. 
 
Division 5.2 
 
ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
SECTION 5.201 – GENERAL 
5.201 Add the following section: 
5.201.1.1 Energy performance. 

--- Page 18 ---
~ 18 ~ 
 
   (a)   All-electric buildings. A newly constructed all-electric non-residential building shall 
demonstrate the Energy Budget for the proposed building is no greater than the Energy Budget 
calculated for the Standard Design Building meeting California Title 24 Part 6 Energy Standards. 
   (b)   Mixed-fuel buildings. A newly constructed mixed-fuel non-residential building shall 
demonstrate the Energy Budget for the proposed building is no greater than 90% of the Title 24 
Part 6 Energy Budget for the Standard Design Building meeting California Title 24 Part 6 
Energy Standards. 
   Exception: Buildings consisting primarily of occupancy F, L, or H are exempt from this 
Section. 
5.201.1.2. Better roofs. 
   (a)   California Title 24 Part 6 Energy Standards section 140.10 requires newly constructed 
buildings of uses noted in Table 140.10-A to install photovoltaic (PV) energy systems, and 
requires the minimum size of such systems to be not less than the smaller of PV direct current 
size determined by Equation 140.10-A, or the total of all Solar Access Roof Area (SARA) 
multiplied by 14 W/ft
2. Projects that constitute a Large Development Project or Small 
Development Project under the Stormwater Management Ordinance (Public Works Code secs 
147-147.6) may exclude from SARA any roof area where both: 
      (1)   The area is occupied by living roof, meaning the area of media for growing plants, and 
      (2)   The area occupied by living roof contributes to determination of compliance with the 
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as documented by a Preliminary Stormwater Control Plan 
or a Modified Compliance Application submitted to the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission. 
   (b)   In any final Stormwater Control Plan approved by the San Francisco Public Utilities 
Commission, including where such approval may occur subsequent to addenda to a Site Permit 
wherein compliance with California Title 24 Part 6 Energy Standards is documented, the 
applicant shall ensure the area occupied by living roof contributing to determination of 
compliance with the Stormwater Management Ordinance is no less than the square footage 
approved for exclusion from SARA. 
Chapter 7 
 
INSTALLER AND SPECIAL INSPECTOR 
QUALIFICATIONS 
SECTION 701 – GENERAL 
701.1 Add the following section: 
701.1 These requirements apply to installers and Special inspectors with regards to the 
requirements of this chapter. 
SECTION 702 – QUALIFICATIONS 
702.2 Modify certification number 2 as follows: 
702.2 Special inspection. … 

--- Page 19 ---
~ 19 ~ 
 
   2.   Certification by a statewide energy consulting or verification organization,[ ← ] 
building performance contractors,  [ ← ]  home energy auditors, and ICC Certified CALGreen 
Inspectors. 
702.3 Add the following section: 
702.3 Special inspection. The Director of the Department of Building Inspection may require 
special inspection to verify compliance with this code or other laws that are enforced by the 
agency. The special inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate competence, to 
the satisfaction of the Director of the Department of Building Inspection, for inspection of the 
particular type of construction or operation requiring special inspection. In addition, the special 
inspector shall have a certification from a recognized state, national, or international association, 
as determined by the Director of the Department of Building Inspection. The area of certification 
shall be closely related to the primary job function, as determined by the local agency. 
SECTION 703 – VERIFICATIONS 
703.1 Modify the section as follows: 
703.1 Documentation. Documentation used to show compliance with this code shall include but 
is not limited to, construction documents, plans, specifications, builder or installer certification, 
inspection reports, or other methods acceptable to the [ ← ] Director of the Department of 
Building Inspection which demonstrate substantial conformance. When specific documentation 
or special inspection is necessary to verify compliance, that method of compliance will be 
specified in [ ← ] Administrative Bulletin 93. 
 
