--- Page 1 ---
ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
2025 Edition 
 
PREFACE 
Text Format: 
   The text in this publication is formatted to allow the user to quickly and easily determine the 
source of the included material. Language derived from the 2025 California Code that 
is unchanged by local amendment is printed in shaded text (see below). Language constituting 
San Francisco amendments to the California Code is printed in unformatted (or “plain”) text. In 
either case, bold and/or italic typefaces may be used as appropriate for emphasis, etc. See below 
for examples. 
   To further simplify use of the San Francisco amendments with corresponding sections of the 
2025 California Code, explanatory remarks appearing in italics are provided (in boxes at the 
beginning of affected provisions) indicating whether the San Francisco amendment to the 
California Code is adding, revising, or replacing a section or portion of a section. 
   To summarize: 
Explanatory remarks are boxed and italicized. 
   Unchanged language from the 2025 California Code is shaded, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
   San Francisco amendments are printed in unformatted ("plain") text, and may 
include bold and/or italicized formatting. 
   An arrow [ ← ] represents the location of language that has been deleted by San Francisco 
from the 2025 California Code. 
   A solid line represents a change from the original published edition of the 2025 San Francisco 
Electrical Code. 
Historical Notations: 
   Language which has been added, amended, or deleted from the 2025 publication of the San 
Francisco Electrical Code is indicated with an historical notation, setting forth the ordinance 
number and date of adoption. 
Additionally, a table is included below that lists and summarizes all legislation that has affected 
this Code and the other Building Inspection Commission codes after their initial enactment. 
Article 89 
 
GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS 
89.101.1 Replace the first sentence of this section with the following: 
89.101.1 Title. [ ← ] The provisions contained in this Code shall be known as the 2022 2025 San 
Francisco Electrical Code, and may be cited as such and will be referred to as “this code.” 
89.115 Add the following section: 

--- Page 2 ---
89.115 Suppression. This code shall supersede all previous Electrical Codes and ordinances in 
the City and County of San Francisco. Nothing herein shall require the revision of electrical 
installation plans submitted prior to the adoption date of this code. Electrical permits obtained 
prior to the effective date of this code shall comply with the provisions of the Electrical Code, 
ordinances, regulations and rulings in effect when the permit was granted. 
89.116 Add the following section: 
89.116 Maintenance. All electrical equipment, wiring and systems and installations shall be 
maintained in a safe operating and code-complying condition. The owner or the owner’s 
designated agent, or both, shall be legally responsible for the maintenance of all electrical wiring 
systems and installations. 
   Nothing contained in this code shall be construed to require any existing electrical equipment, 
wiring or systems regulated by this code to be altered, reconstructed, removed or demolished, 
providing such existing electrical equipment, wiring or system was installed and maintained in 
accordance with the adopted code in effect at the time of installation or subsequent alteration. 
   Unused conductors and cables shall be either removed or suitably identified and terminated in 
an approved manner. 
89.117 Add the following section: 
89.117 Alternate Materials, Design and Methods of Construction. 
   (A)   Alternates Require Approval: The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent 
the use of a product or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided 
any such alternate has been approved and the use authorized by the Building Official. 
   (B)   Equivalency of Alternates. The Building Official may authorize an alternate, provided 
the Building Official finds the proposed design is satisfactory for the intended use and complies 
with the provisions of this code and that the product, method or work offered is, for the purpose 
intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed by this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, 
fire resistivity, durability and safety. 
   (C)   Evidence Required. The Building Official shall require sufficient evidence or proof be 
submitted to substantiate any claims made regarding the use of alternates. The details of any 
action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and shall be entered in the files of the 
Department of Building Inspection. 
   (D)   Conditions and Fees. See Building Code Section 104A.2.8 for conditions and 
Section 110A, Table IA-J – Miscellaneous Fees – for applicable fees. 
89.118 Add the following section: 
89.118 Change in Occupancy. Electrical equipment, wiring and systems which are part of any 
building or structure, or portion thereof, undergoing a change in occupancy or use, as defined in 
the Building Code, shall comply with all requirements of this code which may be applicable to 
the new occupancy or use. 
   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not require the change of existing electrical 
equipment, wiring and systems where such electrical equipment, wiring and systems are deemed 
adequate for the new occupancy involved. 
89.119 Add the following section: 
89.119 Modifications. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the 
provisions of this code, the Building Official may grant modifications for individual cases. The 
Building Official shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this 
code impractical and that the modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this 
code and that such modification does not lessen health, life-safety and fire-safety requirements. 

--- Page 3 ---
The details of any action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the 
Department of Building Inspection. 
89.120 Add the following section: 
89.120 Permits Required. 
   (A)   General. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct, alter, move, add to or 
replace any electrical installation regulated by this code, except as permitted in Section 89.121, 
without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Building Inspection. 
   (B)   Nonliability of City and County of San Francisco. Permits issued under the provisions 
of this code shall contain or be construed to contain an agreement by the owner of the building, 
structure or premises, or the owner’s authorized agent, to save City and County of San Francisco 
officials and employees harmless from all costs, liability and damages resulting, whether directly 
or indirectly, from anything in connection with the work included in the permit, including 
equipment, methods of construction, inspections and approvals. 
   (C)   Application for Permit. Permit applicants shall file with the Department of Building 
Inspection an application form furnished for that purpose. The permit application shall show a 
complete itemization of the proposed electrical installation and the correct address of the job site. 
Electrical permits may be issued to duly licensed contractors who have registered with the 
Central Permit Bureau by having their state contractor’s license verified by the Department of 
Building Inspection, or issued to a homeowner subject to Section 89.120(E). A separate permit 
shall be obtained for each separate building or structure. 
   See Section 110A, Table 1A-E – Electrical Permit Fees – of the Building Code for the 
applicable fees. 
   (D)   Illegal Use of Permit. No person, firm, corporation, or state licensed contractor shall file 
an application for a permit to install any electrical wiring system unless such person, firm, 
corporation, or state licensed contractor shall perform such work. The Building Official or the 
Building Official’s authorized representative shall have the authority to cancel any permit upon 
finding that it is contrary to this section. The permittee shall be responsible for all work 
performed. 
   (E)   Homeowner’s Permit. A permit for electrical work in or about a single-family dwelling 
may be issued by the Building Official to a homeowner, provided the work to be done will be 
performed by the homeowner. If the electrical work performed under the homeowner’s permit 
does not comply with the requirements of this code and if the corrections are not made as 
required by the Department of Building Inspection, then the deficiencies shall be corrected by a 
State licensed electrical contractor under a separate permit. 
   Note: LLC’s are not eligible for an Electrical Homeowner’s Permit 
   (F)   Emergency Work. Emergency electrical work for the protection of persons or property 
shall have a permit obtained within one business day of commencing such work. 
89.121 Add the following section: 
89.121 Work Exempt from Permits. Electrical permits and fees shall not be required for the 
following: 
   (A)   Repair or replacement of Broken or Damaged luminaires where: 
      (1)   the luminaire(s) are not installed to provide emergency illumination required by San 
Francisco Building Code, and 
      (2)   no change in existing wiring is involved, and 
      (3)   the luminaires weigh 22.68 Kg (50 pounds) or less. 
   (B)   Repair or replacement of a domestic appliance where no change in existing wiring is 
involved. 

--- Page 4 ---
   (C)   Replacement of fuses, controls, motors of less than 2 horsepower, and switches and 
receptacles of not more than 20 amperes rating, where no change in existing wiring is involved. 
   (D)   Replacement of circuit breakers, externally operated switches and fuse holders of the 
same type and rating as the defective unit or component, if not rated in excess of 100 amperes. 
Exception: Replacement of main service disconnecting means are subject to permit and 
inspection regardless of rating. 
   (E)   Wiring for temporary theater stages and platforms, motion picture and television studio 
sets supplied from approved electrical outlets installed for the purpose. 
   (F)   Replacement of component parts for electric signs or gas-tube lighting systems of the 
same size and rating. 
   (G)   Installation of data/communications cable and/or outlets in R-3 occupancies and within 
individual residential units (3000 Square Feet or Less), provided they do not monitor or control 
electrical utilization equipment and/or life safety functions. 
89.122 Add the following section: 
89.122 Permit Issuance. 
   (A)   General. An issued permit entitles the permittee to proceed with the installation 
described therein. Work done in excess of that shown on the application will be subject to extra 
permit fees as set forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-F – Specialty Permit Fees – of the Building 
Code. The issuance of a permit does not constitute an approval or an authorization of the work 
specified therein. Neither the issuance of a permit, nor the approval by the Building Official of 
any document, shall constitute an approval of a violation of any provision of this code or any law 
or ordinance. A permit or other document purporting to give authority to violate any code, law or 
ordinance shall not be valid with respect thereto. Permits shall not be transferable. Proposed 
electrical installations delineated on a permit application shall be performed only by the 
permittee or bona fide employee thereof in accordance with the California Code of Regulations, 
Title 8, Chapter 2, Part IV. The permit shall be posted on the job site where the work is to be 
done. 
   (B)   Permit Expiration. Electrical permits expire per Section 106A.4.4 of the San Francisco 
Building Code. Permit fees may be partially refunded if cancellation request is made to the 
Building Official prior to commencement of the permitted work and within 90 days of the date of 
permit issuance. See Section 110A, Table 1A-R – Refunds – of the Building Code for refund. 
   (C)   Commencement of Work on Permit Expired Due to Work Not Started. Before work 
may be commenced on an expired permit on which no work was performed, a new permit shall 
be obtained. 
   (D)   Recommencement of Work on Permit Expired Due to Work Not Completed. The 
applicant shall secure a new permit for the work not completed. The permit fee shall be based 
upon items or work remaining to be done. 
   (E)   Cancellation of Permit: Permits may be canceled by the Building Official: 
      (1)   If after inspection, it is judged by a senior inspector that the permit holder is unable or 
unwilling to correct an unsafe condition or Code violations. 
      (2)   If the permit was obtained fraudulently or under false pretenses. 
89.123 Add the following section: 
89.123 Fees. 
   (A)   General. Permit and inspection fees, as set forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-E – 
Electrical Permit Fees – of the Building Code, shall be paid prior to permit issuance. When 
additional permit or inspection fees are due, they shall be payable prior to issuance of Permission 
to Connect Current, Certificate of Occupancy, or Declaration of Inspection. 

--- Page 5 ---
   (B)   Other Fees. A standard hourly inspection fee shall be charged for services provided by 
Electrical Inspection Division personnel which are not otherwise detailed. See Section 110A, 
Table 1A-G – Inspections, Surveys and Reports – of the Building Code. 
   (C)   Work Without Permit – Investigation Fee. If the Building Official finds that a person, 
company or entity has performed electrical installation work for which a permit is required, 
without first obtaining an electrical permit and payment of fees, the Building Official shall 
require the payment of an investigative fee in addition to the prescribed permit fee. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-K – Penalties, Hearings, Code Enforcement Assessments – of the 
Building Code for the applicable fees. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt 
any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code, nor from any penalty 
prescribed by law. The Building Official may reduce the investigation fee to two times the 
amount of the permit fee as called for in Section 110A, Table 1A-E – Electrical Permit Fees – of 
the Building Code for work that was constructed prior to the current building ownership if the 
owner files with the Building Official a notarized affidavit together with documents 
substantiating such dates of work. 
   Appeal of such investigative fee may be filed with the Board of Appeals in the manner 
provided in Section 8 et seq. of the Business & Tax Regulations Code. Such filing shall be 
subject to the fees and rules of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals, in reviewing the 
appeal, may reduce the appealed amount to not less than two times (2x) the permit fee as set 
forth in Section 110A, Table 1A-E – Electrical Permit Fees – of the Building Code. 
89.124 Add the following new section: 
89.124 Powers and Duties of the Building Official. 
   (A)   General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the 
provisions of this code. For such purposes, the Building Official shall have the powers of a law 
enforcement officer. The Building Official, when necessary, may call upon the Police 
Department and other city agencies for aid or assistance in carrying out or enforcing any of the 
provisions of this code. 
   (B)   Right of Entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of 
this code or other codes or ordinances, or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to 
believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition that is contrary to, or in 
violation of, this code or other codes or ordinances that makes the building or premises unsafe, 
dangerous or hazardous, the Building Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable 
times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code or other codes or ordinances, 
provided that if such building or premises be occupied, credentials be presented to the occupant 
and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official shall first 
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the 
building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building Official shall have 
recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
   (C)   Stop Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, 
or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this code, the 
Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons 
engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop 
such work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. 
   (D)   Temporary Use of Electrical Energy. The Building Official may permit the temporary 
use of electrical energy by any person, firm or corporation in cases where it does not create a 
hazard to life or property. 

--- Page 6 ---
   (E)   Building Official may adopt rules and regulations. The Building Official shall have the 
power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental 
regulations to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations 
shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such rules and regulations, 
commonly referred to as Code Rulings and Administrative Bulletins, supplemental to this code, 
shall not take effect until approved by the Building Inspection Commission and signed by the 
Building Official except in unusual circumstances where the Building Official has determined 
there is an immediate need to protect the public health and safety. When the Building Official 
finds that such circumstances exist, the Building Official may order immediate enforcement of a 
particular rule or regulation. The Building Official shall arrange for a subscription service to 
such rules and regulations, the entire cost of which is to be borne by the subscribers. 
   (F)   Code Revisions. The Building Official shall transmit to the Building Inspection 
Commission, at intervals not exceeding three years, recommendations for changes to this code, 
based on studies of the following: 
      (1)   Requests of the Board of Examiners for variances from this code, and for approvals of 
alternate materials, alternate designs and methods of construction. 
      (2)   Code changes recommended by the Board of Examiners. 
      (3)   Code changes recommended by the Code Advisory Committee or other bodies 
subordinate to the Building Inspection Commission. 
      (4)   Results obtained and problems encountered from legal actions taken to correct code 
violations. 
      (5)   Changes or improvements in materials, methods of construction or design, and changes 
proposed by interested persons. 
      (6)   Investigations of fire and structural damage to buildings, and of complaints of 
unsatisfactory electrical system performance. 
      (7)   Periodic changes to the California Electrical Code and other State regulations which 
may affect this code. 
      (8)   Administrative Bulletins and Code Rulings currently in effect. 
      (9)   Violations of this code found on inspections and investigations. 
   (G)   Disconnection of Electric Service Due to Serious and Imminent Hazards. The 
building Official shall have the authority to disconnect electric service to a building, structure, 
property or equipment regulated by this code when it is necessary to abate a serious and 
imminent hazard to the life, health or safety of the occupant or other persons, or such building, 
structure or property. See Section 102A of the Building Code. Persons shall not reconnect such 
electrical supply until authorized in writing by the Building Official. 
89.125 Add the following section: 
89.125 Violation. Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, who violates, 
disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or resists or opposes the execution of any of 
the provisions of this code, shall be liable for a civil penalty, not to exceed $500 for each day 
such violation is committed or permitted to continue, which penalty shall be assessed and 
recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people of the City and County of San 
Francisco by the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any penalty assessed and 
recovered in an action brought pursuant to this paragraph shall be paid to the City Treasurer and 
credited to the Department of Building Inspection’s Special Fund. 
   Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, who violates, disobeys, omits, 
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the execution of any of the 
provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be 

--- Page 7 ---
punished by a fine not exceeding $500, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both 
such fine and imprisonment, unless otherwise provided in this code, and shall be deemed guilty 
of a separate offense for every day such violation, disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal 
shall continue. Any person who shall do any work in violation of any of the provisions of this 
code, and any person having charge of such work who shall permit it to be done, shall be liable 
for the penalty provided. 
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the posting of any notice provided for in 
this code, or to tear down or mutilate any such notice so posted by the Department of Building 
Inspection. 
89.126 Add the following section: 
89.126 Unsafe Buildings or Structures. Any buildings, structures, or parts thereof, shall be 
considered unsafe when any of the following conditions are present: 
   (A)   Electrical equipment, wiring and systems deemed hazardous to human life or structure 
safety; 
   (B)   Electrical equipment, wiring and systems that are in violation of the code that was in 
effect at the time of construction or installation or such work was performed without permit or 
approval; 
   (C)   Change in occupancy without complying with the provision of Section 89.118 of this 
code. 
   Such unsafe building, structure, property or portion shall be vacated, repaired, altered or 
demolished, and violations of this code abated, in accordance with Section 102A of the Building 
Code, including, but not limited to, Sections 102A.3 through 102A.8. 
89.127 Add the following section: 
89.127 Inspection. 
   (A)   General. All electrical equipment, wiring and systems, regulated by this code and for 
which a permit is required, shall be subject to inspection to insure compliance with this code. 
Upon the completion and final approval of the permitted installation and payment of all permit 
and inspection fees, a Declaration of Inspection shall be issued. Said declaration shall indicate in 
concise terms the electrical installation thus approved and the date of approval. 
   (B)   Unlawful Use of Electrical Energy. It shall be unlawful to energize an electrical 
installation in, on or about any building, structure or property in the City and County of San 
Francisco unless a Certificate to Connect Current (Green Tag) has been issued. The Certificate to 
Connect Current authorizes the owner of the structure to energize the permitted installation. 
   (C)   Inspection Requests. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to notify the 
Electrical Inspection Division orally or in writing when the permitted installation will be ready 
for inspection. Such notification shall be given at least 24 hours before any inspection is desired. 
Inspections may be performed outside of normal inspection hours by prior arrangement and 
prepayment. See Section 110A, Table 1A-G – Off-hours Inspections – of the Building Code for 
the applicable fees. 
   (D)   Required Inspections. Required inspections shall include: 
      (1)   Pre-Cover Inspection. Electrical equipment, wiring and systems authorized by permit 
shall be inspected for code compliance prior to covering or concealing. 
      (2)   Final Inspection. Final inspection and demonstration of satisfactory operation shall be 
made after the installation authorized by permit has been completed. 
      (3)   Other Inspection. As may be required to insure compliance with the provisions of this 
code. 

--- Page 8 ---
   (E)   Electrical Wiring or Installation Unlawful to Conceal. It shall be unlawful to conceal, 
cover, or put into use electrical wiring, installations, or parts thereof, until such has been 
inspected and accepted as prescribed in this code. Whenever such work is concealed or covered 
before first having been inspected and approved, or whenever electrical wiring or systems are 
installed and concealed or covered without a permit, the Building Official may require, by 
written notice to the responsible person(s) that such wiring or installation be exposed for 
inspection. The work of exposing and reconstructing portions of a structure for such work shall 
not entail expense to the City and County of San Francisco or any of its officials or employees. 
   (F)   Reinspections. Reinspections shall be required when any of the following conditions 
occurs: 
      (1)   When the portion of the work for which inspection is requested is incomplete or not 
code complying. 
      (2)   When previously identified deficiencies in the work are not properly corrected. 
      (3)   When the approved construction documents are not available to the inspector. 
      (4)   When access is not provided on the date and time of the inspection appointment. 
      (5)   When there are deviations from the approved construction documents. 
   The first reinspection for failure to comply with code requirements shall not be assessed a 
reinspection fee. All subsequent reinspections on a job for the same or subsequent errors or 
omissions shall be charged with a reinspection fee. A Certificate of Final Completion and 
Occupancy or final approval shall not be granted until the required fees are paid. See 
Section 110A, Table 1A-G – Inspections, Surveys and Reports – of the Building Code for 
applicable reinspection fees. 
89.128 Add the following section: 
89.128 Survey. An electrical survey may be requested when an electrical inspector’s assistance 
is desired to establish code compliance of existing or proposed electrical equipment, wiring and 
installations. See Section 110A, Table 1A-G of the Building Code for applicable fees. 
89.129 Add the following section: 
89.129 Board of Examiners. Application may be made to the Board of Examiners for approval 
of alternate materials, methods and types of construction and for variances from the provisions of 
this code. See Building Code, Section 105A.1. 
ARTICLE 90 – INTRODUCTION 
No San Francisco Electrical Code Amendments. 
Chapter 1. 
 
General 
ARTICLE 110 – 
 
REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS 
110.15 Revise this section as follows: 

--- Page 9 ---
110.15 High-Leg Marking. On a 4-wire, delta-connected system where the midpoint of one 
phase winding is grounded, only the conductor or busbar having the higher phase voltage to 
ground shall be durably and permanently marked by an outer finish that is [ ← ] purple in color 
or by other effective means. Such identification shall be placed at each point on the system 
where a connection is made if the grounded conductor is also present. 
   Information Note: Identification of Ungrounded Branch Circuit Conductors & Feeder 
conductors shall comply with Section 210.5(C)(1) Branch Circuits Supplied from More Than 
One Nominal Voltage System & 215.12(C)(1) Feeders Supplied from More Than One Nominal 
Voltage System. 
110.26(A)(3) Revise this section as follows: 
      (3)   Height of Working Space. The work space shall be clear and extend from the grade, 
floor, or platform to a height of 2.0 m (61/2 ft) or the height of the equipment, whichever is 
greater. Within the height requirements of this section, other equipment that is associated with 
the electrical installation and is located above or below the electrical equipment shall be 
permitted to extend not more than 150 mm (6 in.) beyond the front of the electrical equipment. 
Exception No. 1: On battery systems mounted on open racks, the top clearance shall comply 
with 480.10(D). 
Exception No. 2: [ ← ] [Exception deleted by local amendment.] 
Exception No. 3: Meters that are installed in meter sockets shall be permitted to extend beyond 
the other equipment. The meter socket shall be required to follow the rules of this section. 
110.26(B) Revise this section as follows: 
   (B)   Clear Spaces. Working space required by this section shall not be used for storage. When 
normally enclosed live parts are exposed for inspection or servicing, the working space, if in a 
passageway or general open space, shall be suitably guarded. The standing area of the workspace 
shall not contain obstructions, abrupt changes in grade, or irregularities. 
Chapter 2. 
 
Wiring and Protection 
ARTICLE 210 – BRANCH CIRCUITS 
210.5(C)(1)(a) Revise this section as follows: 
   (a)   Means of Identification. The means of identification for conductors #8AWG or 
larger shall be permitted to be by separate color coding, marking tape, tagging, or other approved 
means. Conductors of any size in cable assemblies may be suitably identified at all termination, 
connection and splice points. Conductor insulation in raceways shall contain continuous color 
pigment for circuit wire sizes # 10 AWG and smaller. 
   Phase Identification Colors for Branch Circuits shall be as follows: 
      (1)   120/240 Volt 3-Wire Single Phase Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red. 
      (2)   120/208 Volt 4-Wire 3-Phase Wye Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red, “C” 
Phase Blue. 
      (3)   120/240 Volt 3-Phase Delta Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” (High Leg) Phase Purple, 
“C” Phase Red. 
         Information Note: New Construction or Complete Remodel of an Existing Building 

--- Page 10 ---
      (4)   120/240 Volt 3-Phase Delta Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red, “C” (High 
Leg) Phase Purple. 
         Information Note: Partial Remodel of an Existing Building – i.e. Replace Main Electrical 
Service where “C” Phase is Purple, & Re-Connect Existing Panels. 
      (5)   277/480 Volt 4-Wire 3-Phase Wye Systems – “A” Phase Brown, “B” Phase Orange, “C” 
Phase Yellow. 
      (6)   Ungrounded conductors for other voltages shall be identified by different color coding, 
marking tape, tagging, or other approved means. 
      (7)   Branch Circuit Conductors for switch legs may be of a different color than the 
Ungrounded Circuit Conductor when suitably identified at pull boxes, junction boxes and outlet 
boxes with marking tape, tagging or other equally effective means. 
   Exception No 1: In Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Buildings supplied by 120/208 Volt 4-Wire 3-
Phase Systems, within Dwelling Units supplied by 120/208 Volt 3-Wire Single Phase Systems, 
Ungrounded Branch Circuit Conductor shall be permitted to be “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase 
Red. 
   Informational Note: See Section 200.7 for limitations on re-identification of white or grey for 
Grounded Conductors, and 250.119 for prohibition on using Green for Ungrounded Conductors. 
ARTICLE 215 – FEEDERS 
215.12(C)(1)(a) Revise this section as follows: 
   (a)   Means of Identification. The means of identification for conductor #8 AWG or 
larger shall be permitted to be by separate color coding, marking tape, tagging, or other approved 
means. Conductors of any size in cable assemblies may be suitably identified at all termination, 
connection and splice points. 
   Phase Identification Colors for Feeders shall be as follows: 
      (1)   120/240 Volt 3-Wire Single Phase Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red. 
      (2)   120/208 Volt 4-Wire 3-Phase Wye Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red, “C” 
Phase Blue. 
      (3)   120/240 Volt 3-Phase Delta Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase (High Leg) Purple, 
“C” Phase Red. 
         Information Note: New Construction or Complete Remodel of an Existing Building 
      (4)   120/240 Volt 3-Phase Delta Systems – “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red, “C” Phase 
(High Leg) Purple. 
         Information Note: Partial Remodel of an Existing Building – i.e. Replace Main Electrical 
Service where “C” Phase is Purple, & Re-Connect Existing Panels. 
      (5)   277/480 Volt 4-Wire 3-Phase Wye Systems – “A” Phase Brown, “B” Phase Orange, “C” 
Phase Yellow. 
      (6)   Ungrounded conductors for other voltages shall be identified by different color coding, 
marking tape, tagging, or other approved means. 
      (7)   Branch Circuit Conductors for Switch Legs may be of a different color than the 
Ungrounded Feeder Circuit Conductor when suitably identified at pull boxes, junction boxes and 
outlet boxes with marking tape, tagging or other equally effective means. 
      (8)   In Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Buildings supplied by 120/208 Volt 4-Wire 3-Phase 
Systems, within Dwelling Units supplied by 120/208 Volt- 3-Wire Single Phase Systems, within 

--- Page 11 ---
Dwelling Units supplied by 120/208 Volt 3-Wire Single Phase Systems, Ungrounded Feeder 
Conductors shall be the following: 
            a)   120/208 Volt 3 Wire Single Phase “A” Phase Black, “B” Phase Red 
            b)   120/208 Volt 3 Wire Single Phase “B” Phase Red, “C” Phase Blue 
            c)   120/208 Volt 3 Wire Single Phase “A” Phase Black, “C” Phase Blue 
            d)   Labeling Required at the Sub-Panel indicating which Phases Serve the Unit from the 
120/208 Volt 4-Wire 3-Phase Multi / Meter Distribution System 
   Informational Note: See Section 200.7 for limitations on identification of white or grey for 
Grounded Conductors, and 250.119 for prohibition on using Green for Ungrounded Conductors. 
   Informational Note: See 210.5(C)(1) for additional information regarding Identification of 
Ungrounded Conductors. 
ARTICLE 230 – SERVICES 
230.43 Revise this section as follows: 
230.43 Wiring Methods for 1000 Volts, Nominal, or Less. 
   (A)   Acceptable Wiring Methods. Service-entrance conductors shall be installed in 
accordance with the applicable requirements of this Code covering the type of wiring method 
used and shall be limited to the following methods: 
  (1)    [ ← ]  Reserved 
  (2)    [ ← ] Reserved 
      (3)   Rigid metal conduit (RMC) 
      (4)   Intermediate metal conduit (IMC) 
  (5)    [ ← ] Reserved 
  (6)    [ ← ] Reserved 
  (7)    [ ← ] Reserved 
  (8)    [ ← ] Reserved 
      (9)   Busways 
      (10)   Auxiliary gutters 
      (11)   Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit (PVC) 
 (12)    [ ← ] Reserved 
 (13)    [ ← ] Reserved 
      (14)   Mineral-insulated, metal sheathed cable, Type MI 
      (15)    [ ← ] Reserved 
      (16)    [ ← ] Reserved 
      (17)   High density polyethylene conduit (HDPE) 
      (18)   Non-metallic underground conduit with conductors (NUCC) 
      (19)   Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit (RTRC) 
      (20)   [ ← ] Reserved 
      (21)   [ ← ] Reserved 
   (B)   Raceway Size. Minimum raceway size shall comply with the following: 


--- Page 12 ---
      (1)   Except as provided in Section 230.43(B)(2) and (3) the minimum size raceway installed 
for service entrance conductor shall be 1-1/4 inch (31.8 mm). 
      (2)   Raceways for service entrance conductors for sign or billboard lighting shall not be 
smaller than 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) conduit. 
      (3)   Installations consisting of not more than two 2-wire branch circuits may be supplied by 
No. 8 conductors in 3/4 inch (19.1 mm) conduit. 
   Exception: New service entrance conductors may be re-pulled in previously approved service 
raceways, provided the installation complies with the requirements of SFEC Section 89.116 and 
Chapters 1, 2 and 3. 
   Informational Note: Refer to electric utility service requirements for raceway sizes. 
230.56 Revise this section as follows: 
230.56 Service Conductor with the Higher Voltage to Ground. On a four-wire, delta-
connected service, where the midpoint of one phase winding is grounded, the service conductor 
having the higher phase voltage to ground shall be durably and permanently marked by an outer 
finish that is purple in color, or by other effective means, at each termination or junction point. 
230.71(A) Revise this section and add two exceptions as follows: 
230.71 Maximum Number of Disconnects. 
   (A)   General. The service disconnecting means for each service permitted by 230.2, or for 
each set of service-entrance conductors permitted by 230.40, Exception Nos. 1, 3, 4, or 5, shall 
consist of [ ← ] a single circuit breaker or switch and set of fuses. 
   For the purpose of this section, disconnecting means installed as part of listed equipment and 
used solely for the following shall not be considered a service disconnecting means: 
      (1)   Power monitoring equipment 
      (2)   Surge-protective device(s) 
      (3)   Control circuit of the ground-fault protection system 
      (4)   Power-operable service disconnecting means. 
   Exception No. 1: 
   a)   Multi-Family Dwellings with a Maximum of (6) units, shall consist of not more than six 
switches or sets of circuit-breakers, or a combination of not more than six switches and sets of 
circuit breakers, mounted in a single enclosure, in a group of separate enclosures, or in or on a 
switchboard or in switchgear. 
   b)   There shall be not more than six sets of disconnects per service grouped in any one 
location. 
   Exception No. 2: A Single Main Circuit Breaker or set of fuses shall be provided for each 
Dwelling Unit. 
ARTICLE 250 – GROUNDING AND BONDING 
250.50 Revise the first paragraph of this section as follows: 
250.50 Grounding Electrode System. All grounding electrodes as described in 250.52(A)(1) 
through (A)(7) that are present at each building or structure served shall be bonded together to 
form the grounding electrode system. A concrete encased electrode as defined by 250.52(A)(3) 
shall be installed at each new building or structure, and for existing buildings or structures when 
a new or replacement foundation or footing with a perimeter length of 6.0 m (20 ft.) or more is 
installed in direct contact with the earth.  If none of these electrodes exist, one or more of the 
grounding electrodes specified in 250.52(A)(4) through (A)(8) shall be installed and used. 

--- Page 13 ---
   Exception: Concrete-encased electrodes of existing buildings or structures shall not be 
required to be part of the grounding electrode system if the rebar is not accessible for use without 
disturbing the concrete. 
250.64(A) Revise this section as follows: 
250.64(A)   Aluminum or Copper-Clad Aluminum Conductors. Bare aluminum or copper-
clad aluminum grounding electrode conductors shall not be used where in direct contact with 
masonry or the earth or where subject to corrosive conditions. [ ← ] Aluminum or copper-clad 
aluminum grounding electrode conductors shall not be [ ← ] installed on the outside of a 
building or structure. 
250.64(B) Revise this section as follows: 
250.64(B)   Securing and Protection Against Physical Damage.  If exposed, a grounding 
electrode conductor or its enclosure shall be securely fastened to the surface on which it is 
carried. Grounding electrode conductors shall be permitted to be installed on or through framing 
members. 
      (1)   Not Exposed to Physical Damage. A 6 AWG [ ← ] grounding electrode 
conductor [ ← ] that is free from exposure to physical damage shall be permitted to be run along 
the surface of the building construction without metal covering or protection. 
       (2)   Exposed to Physical Damage. A [ ← ] 4 AWG or larger copper or aluminum 
grounding electrode conductor exposed to physical damage shall be protected in rigid metal 
conduit (RMC), intermediate metal conduit (IMC), rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit (PVC), 
reinforced thermosetting resin conduit Type XW (RTRC-XW), electrical metallic tubing (EMT), 
or cable armor. Exposed grounding electrode conductors that are accessible to the general public 
shall be installed in approved metallic raceway. 
      (3)   Smaller than 6 AWG. Grounding electrode conductors smaller than 6 AWG shall be 
protected in RMC, IMC, PVC, RTRC-XW, EMT, or cable armor. 6 AWG or smaller grounding 
electrode conductors shall not be installed exposed below 5 feet. 
      (4)   In contact with the Earth. Grounding electrode conductors and grounding electrode 
bonding jumpers in contact with the earth shall not be required to comply with 300.5, or 305.15 
but shall be buried or otherwise protected if subject to physical damage. 
Chapter 3. 
 
Wiring Methods and Materials 
ARTICLE 300 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
WIRING METHODS AND MATERIALS 
300.3(C) Revise this section as follows: 
300.3(C)   Conductors of Different Systems. 
   (1)   1000 Volts ac, 1500 volts dc Nominal or Less. Conductors of ac and dc circuits rated 
1000 volts ac, 1500 volts dc, circuits.    [ ← ] from separately derived systems, from separate 
services, or from separate utility meters shall not be permitted to occupy the same equipment 
wiring enclosure, cable or raceway with conductors from other systems, services, or meters. All 


--- Page 14 ---
conductors shall have an insulation rating equal to at least the maximum circuit voltage applied 
to any conductor within the enclosure, cable, or raceway. 
   Secondary wiring to electric-discharge lamps of 1000 volts ac, 1500 volts dc or less, if 
insulated for the secondary voltage involved, shall be permitted to occupy the same luminaire, 
sign, or outline lighting enclosure as the branch-circuit conductors. 
   Informational Note No. 1: See 725.136(A) for Class 2 and 3 circuit conductors. 
   Informational Note No. 2: See 690.31(B) for photovoltaic source and output circuits. 
   Exception No 1: Photovoltaic Systems: PV Source Circuits and PV Output Circuits in 
accordance with Section 690.31(B) Identification and Grouping. 
   Exception No. 2: Emergency Systems: Conductors installed in accordance with Section 700.10 
Wiring. 
   Exception No. 3: Remote-Control, Signaling, and Power-Limited Circuits: Class 1, 2 or 3 
Conductors installed in accordance with Article 725.136(A) General. 
   Exception No. 4: Auxiliary Gutters: When approved by the AHJ Conductors connected to 
Separately Derived Systems, Service Equipment, or Meter Banks Article 366. 
300.4(I) Add the following section: 
   (I)   Subject to Physical Damage. Premises wiring systems installed less than 2.44 m (8 feet) 
above a walking surface or finished floor are considered subject to physical damage. 
300.37 Revise this section as follows: 
300.37 Aboveground Wiring Methods. Aboveground conductors, 12KV or larger, in 
Residential or Commercial Occupancies, shall be installed in Rigid Steel Conduit. 
   Aboveground conductors less than 12 KV, in other than Residential or Commercial 
Occupancies, shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, in intermediate metal conduit, in electrical 
metallic tubing, in RTRC and PVC conduit, in cable trays, in auxiliary gutters, as busways, as 
cablebus, in other identified raceways, or as exposed runs of metal-clad cable suitable for the use 
and purpose. In locations accessible to qualified persons only, exposed runs of Type MV cables, 
bare conductors, and bare busbars shall also be permitted. Busbars shall be permitted tobe either 
copper or aluminum. 
ARTICLE 320 – ARMORED CABLE: TYPE AC 
320.108 Revise this section as follows: 
320.108 Equipment Grounding Conductor. Type AC cable shall provide an adequate path for 
fault current as required by 250.4(A)(5) or (B)(4) to act as an equipment grounding 
conductor. An equipment grounding conductor, sized as required by Table 250.122, shall be 
provided within the cable assembly. 
ARTICLE 330 – METAL-CLAD CABLE: TYPE MC 
330.12 Revise item (1) as follows: 
330.12 Uses Not Permitted. Type MC cable shall not be used under either of the following 
conditions: 
   (1)   Where subject to physical damage 
   Informational Note: See the 2022 2025 San Francisco Electrical Code Section 300.4 (I) 
Subject to Physical Damage. 
   ... 

--- Page 15 ---
   Exception: Type MC Cable #4 AWG or larger, installed in a lockable room dedicated solely to 
an electrical service and distribution equipment and accessible only to qualified personnel, shall 
be considered to have equivalent protection from physical damage when in-stalled in a neat and 
workman like manner, properly supported, and securely fastened in place. 
330.108 Revise this section as follows: 
330.108 Equipment Grounding Conductor. Where Type MC cable is used to provide an 
equipment grounding conductor, it shall comply with 250.118(10) and 250.122. An equipment 
grounding conductor, sized as required by Table 250.122, shall be provided within the cable 
assembly. 
ARTICLE 334 – NONMETALLIC-SHEATHED CABLE: 
TYPES NM, NMC, AND NMS 
334.10 Revise Item (2) as follows: 
334.10 Uses permitted. 
   (2)   Multi-family dwellings permitted to be of Types III, IV, and V wood 
frame construction not exceeding 6 stories as defined by the San Francisco Building Code except 
as prohibited in 334.12. 
334.12 Add Items (11), (12) and (13) as follows: 
334.12 Uses Not Permitted. 
   (A)   Types NM and NMC. 
      (11)   In any nonresidential structure or occupancy. 
      (12)   In Common Areas of Multi-family Dwelling Units of Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of 
Type IIIA construction per the 2022 2025 California Building Code 510.5 
      (13)   Nominal voltages above 120 volts to ground 
ARTICLE 340 – UNDERGROUND FEEDER AND 
BRANCH-CIRCUIT CABLE: TYPE UF 
340.10 Revise Item (1) as follows: 
340.10 Uses Permitted. Type UF cable shall be permitted as follows: 
   (1)   For use underground in systems not exceeding 50 volts, including direct burial in the 
earth. For underground requirements see 300.5. 
ARTICLE 348 – FLEXIBLE METAL CONDUIT: TYPE 
FMC 
348.10 Revise this section as follows: 
348.10 Uses Permitted. FMC shall be permitted to be used in [ ← ]  concealed locations and 
where necessary for flexibility in lengths not to exceed 1.829 m (6 feet). 
ARTICLE 350 – LIQUIDTIGHT FLEXIBLE METAL 
CONDUIT: TYPE LFMC 
350.10 Revise the first sentence as follows: 

--- Page 16 ---
350.10 Uses Permitted. LFMC shall be permitted to be used [ ← ]  exposed where necessary for 
flexibility in lengths not to exceed 1.829 m (6 feet) or concealed locations as follows: 
ARTICLE 352 – RIGID POLYVINYL CHLORIDE 
CONDUIT: TYPE PVC 
352.10 Revise Items (A) through (K) as follows: 
352.10 Uses Permitted. The use of PVC conduit shall be permitted in accordance with 352.10 
(A) through (K). 
(A) [ ← ] Reserved 
(B) Encased in Concrete PVC conduit shall be permitted [ ← ] embedded in concrete. The 
conduit may emerge not more than 3 inches from the concrete within wiring enclosures, 
otherwise metal raceways shall be provided where emerging from the concrete. 
(C) Corrosive Influences. 
PVC conduit shall be permited in locations subject to severe corrosive influences as covered in 
300.6 and where subject to chemicals for which the materials are specifically approved. 
(D) Cinders 
PCV conduit shall be permitted in cinder fill. 
(E) Reserved 
(F) Reserved 
(G) Reserved 
(H) Underground installations. For underground installations, PVC shall be permitted for direct 
burial and underground encased in concrete. See 300.5 and 305.15. 
(I) Reserved 
(J) Reserved 
(K) Reserved 
 
ARTICLE 355 – REINFORCED THERMOSETTING 
RESIN CONDUIT: TYPE RTRC 
355.10 Revise Item (A) as follows: 
355.10 Uses Permitted. The use of RTRC shall be permitted in accordance with 355.10(A) 
through (I). 
   (A)   Concealed. RTRC shall be permitted [ ← ] embedded in concrete. The conduit may 
emerge not more than 3 inches from the concrete within wiring enclosures, otherwise metal 
raceways shall be provided where emerging from the concrete. 
ARTICLE 356 – LIQUIDTIGHT FLEXIBLE 
NONMETALLIC CONDUIT: TYPE LFNC 
356.10 Revise the first sentence of this section and item (5) as follows: 
356.10 Uses Permitted. LFNC shall be permitted to be used in exposed locations in lengths not 
to exceed 1.8m (6 feet) or concealed locations where encased in concrete for the following 
purposes: 
   (5)   When approved by the AHJ, Type LFNC shall be permitted to be installed in lengths 
longer than 1.8 m (6 feet) where secured in accordance with 356.30. 


--- Page 17 ---
ARTICLE 358 – ELECTRICAL METALLIC TUBING: 
TYPE EMT 
358.10(D) Add a second paragraph as follows: 
358.10(D)   Wet Locations. 
   Where EMT emerges from concrete in a damp or wet location, it shall be protected against 
corrosion at the point of emergence by wrapping of PVC tape, or by other approved means. 
358.12 Add Item (3) as follows: 
358.12 Uses Not Permitted. EMT shall not be used under the following conditions: 
   (3)   In concrete slabs on grade. 
ARTICLE 362 – ELECTRICAL NONMETALLIC 
TUBING: TYPE ENT 
362.10 Revise Item 6 and delete Items 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 as follows: 
362.10 Uses Permitted. For the purpose of this article, the first floor of a building shall be that 
floor that has 50 percent or more of the exterior wall surface area level with or above finished 
grade. One additional level that is the first level and not designed for human habitation and used 
only for vehicle parking, storage, or similar use shall be permitted. The use of ENT and fittings 
shall be permitted in the following: 
   (1)  [ ← ]    Reserved. 
   (2)  [ ← ]   Reserved. 
   (4)  [ ← ]   Reserved. 
   (5)  [ ← ]   Reserved. 
   (6)   Encased in poured concrete floors, ceiling, walls, and slabs. Metal raceways shall be 
provided where emerging  
from the concrete. 
   (7)  Embedded in concrete slab on grade where ENT is placed on sand or approved screenings, 
provided fittings identified for the purpose are used for connections. Metal raceways shall be 
provided where emerging from the concrete. 
   (8)  [ ← ]   Reserved. 
   (9)  [ ← ]   Reserved. 
   (10)[ ← ]    Reserved 
ARTICLE 378 – NONMETALLIC WIREWAYS 
378.12 Add Item (6) as follows: 
378.12 Uses Not Permitted. Nonmetallic wireways shall not be used in the following: 
   (6)   Where the voltage of the contained conductors is in excess of 50 volts. 
Chapter 4. 
 
Equipment for General Use 

--- Page 18 ---
ARTICLE 410 – LUMINAIRES (LIGHTING FIXTURES), 
LAMPHOLDERS, AND LAMPS 
410.36(B) Revise this section as follows: 
410.36(B)   Suspended Ceilings. Framing members of suspended ceiling systems used to 
support luminaires shall be securely fastened to each other and shall be securely attached to the 
building structure at appropriate intervals. Luminaires shall be securely fastened to the ceiling 
framing member by mechanical means such as bolts, screws, or rivets. Listed clips identified for 
use with the type of ceiling framing member(s) and luminaire(s) shall also be permitted. All 
luminaires or luminaire outlets supported by suspended ceiling systems shall have supplemental 
support wires (minimum #12 gauge) connected from the fixture housing or fixture support 
bracket to the structure above. Recessed lighting fixtures measuring 610 mm (2 feet) nominal or 
larger in any dimension shall have two (minimum #12 gauge) support wires. See CBC Section 
808.1.1.1 and ASTM standards C635 and C636. 
   Exception: Supplemental support wires shall not be required when listed clips identified to be 
used without supplemental ceiling wires in compliance with CBC Section 808.1.1.1 are installed. 
ARTICLE 411 – LOW VOLTAGE LIGHTING 
411.5 Revise Section 411.5(A) as follows: Revise Section 411.6(A)as follows: 
411.6 Specific Location Requirements. 
   (A)   Walls, Floors and Ceilings. Conductors concealed or extended through a wall, floor, 
ceiling, or suspended ceiling shall be in accordance one of the following: 
      (1)   Installed using any of the wiring methods specified in Chapter 3 
      (2)   Installed using wiring supplied by a listed Class 2 power source and installed in 
accordance with 725.130. 
Chapter 5. 
 
Special Occupancies 
No San Francisco Electrical Code Amendments. 
Chapter 6. 
 
Special Equipment 
No San Francisco Electrical Code Amendments. 
Chapter 7. 
 
Special Conditions 
ARTICLE 700 – EMERGENCY SYSTEMS 

--- Page 19 ---
700.12(I)(2) 700.12(H)(2)Revise item (2) and (5) of this section as follows: 
700.12(H)(2)  Installation of Unit Equipment. Unit equipment shall be installed in accordance 
with the following: 
   (2)   Unit equipment shall be permanently fixed (i.e., not portable) in place and shall have 
all wiring to each unit installed in accordance with the requirements of any of the wiring methods 
in Chapter 3. Flexible cord-and-plug connection shall not be permitted  [ ← ]  . 
   (5)   Emergency luminaires (illumination fixtures) that obtain power from a unit equipment and 
are not part of the unit equipment shall be wired to the unit equipment as required by 700.10 and 
by one of the wiring methods of Chapter 3. 
700.16(A) Revise this section as follows: 
700.16(A)   Emergency Illumination. Emergency illumination shall include means of egress 
lighting, illuminated exit signs, and all other luminaires specified as necessary to provide 
required illumination. Emergency illumination shall be provided at the location of transfer 
switches, switchboards and panelboards that supply emergency and legally required stand-by 
loads. 
ARTICLE 760 – FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 
760.46 Revise this section as follows: 
760.46 NPLFA Circuit Wiring. Installation of non-power-limited fire alarm circuits shall be in 
accordance with 110.3(B), 300.7, 300.11, 300.15, 300.17, 300.19(B), and other appropriate 
articles of Chapter 3. Conductors shall be installed in metallic raceways or concrete-encased 
nonmetallic raceways. 
    Exception No. 1: A s provided in Sections 760.48 through 760.53. 
[ ← ] [Editor’s Note: Exception 2 is deleted by local amendment.] 
760.130(A) Revise Exception No. 2 of this section as follows: 
   (A)   NPLFA Wiring Methods and Materials. Installation shall be in accordance with 
760.46, and conductors shall be solid or stranded copper. 
   Exception No. 2: Conductors and multiconductor cables described in and installed in 
accordance with 760.49 [ ← ]  shall be permitted. 
760.130(B) Revise the first paragraph of this section as follows: 
760.130(B)   PLFA Wiring Methods and Materials. Power-limited fire alarm conductors and 
cables described in 760.179 shall be installed [ ← ] in metallic raceway in accordance with 
760.46. Devices shall be installed in accordance with 110.3(B), 300.7, 300.11(A), and 300.15. 
760.180 Add the following new section: 
760.180 System Requirements. 
   (A)   Supervising Station Fire Alarm Systems. Supervising station fire alarm system wiring 
installed within or on buildings shall be installed in metallic race ways. 
   Exception: Communication conductors installed entirely within a dedicated telephone 
equipment room, switchboard area or fire control room. 
   (B)   Source of Power. Circuits supplying fire alarm control units that are not monitored by an 
approved supervising station, or a constantly attended location approved by the fire code official 
shall be connected to either the line or load side of the service disconnect. Circuits shall be 
protected by means of an externally operated fused safety switch or a circuit breaker either in a 
separate enclosure or within a switchboard entirely separate from other circuit breakers. The 
switch and/or circuit breaker shall be clearly labeled and locked in the on position. 
   Informational Note: 
 See CEC (2016) (2025)760.41 & 760.121; CBC (2016) (2025)903.4; 
NFPA 72 (2016) 10.5.3; NFPA 13 (2016) 6.8.4.1 


--- Page 20 ---
Chapter 8. 
 
Communications Systems 
No San Francisco Electrical Code Amendments 
Chapter 9. 
 
Tables 
No San Francisco Electrical Code Amendments 
 