NO. AB-028   :
	
 


DATE   :
	
April 3, 2013 (Updated 01/01/2023 for code references)
(Supersedes Administrative Bulletin AB-028 dated 9/18/2002)


SUBJECT   :
	
General Administrative Procedures


TITLE   :
	
Pre-application and Pre-addendum Plan Review Procedures


PURPOSE   :
	
To establish policies and procedures allowing for review and comment of specific design issues by the Department of Building Inspection (DBI) prior to application for a permit or prior to the submittal of addenda to a Site Permit.


REFERENCE   :
	
Current edition of the San Francisco Building Code
   - Section 106A.4.9 Pre-application Plan Review or Inspection
   - Section 110A, Table 1A-B, Other Building Permit and Plan Review Fees
   - DBI Administrative Bulletin AB-032, Site Permit Processing


DISCUSSION   :
	
A preliminary verbal interpretation of a code requirement or alternate method of construction is considered informal information and may not always be accepted by the Department of Building Inspection plan reviewer or supervisor who has been assigned to check the submittal documents for a project. Rather than wait for the plan review to reveal requirements of specific design issues, it may be advantageous to project sponsors to verify code requirements with a formal DBI interpretation prior to completion of project drawings and before submitting an application for a building permit or an addendum to a Site Permit.
 
This bulletin sets out the procedure for requesting, conducting and concluding such a Pre-application or Pre-Addendum Plan Review Meeting. It is not intended that a general, non-directed plan review of a project will be made during this meeting, but that specific code issues will be addressed and resolved. Formal written confirmation of decisions agreed upon will be issued to the project sponsor following the meeting.
Request For Pre-Application or Pre-Addendum Plan Review Meeting
1.   Submit requests for a pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting in writing as follows:
   a.   List the items to be reviewed in the form of specific questions. The applicant shall propose a solution or provide a statement of position regarding each question asked, and shall include pertinent code references. Each item should be numbered. This list of questions or items will then form the agenda for review and response.
   b.   Include applicable drawings, documents, and other information as necessary to describe the conditions under question.
   c.   On the submitted drawings, highlight or “cloud” the areas to be reviewed, and provide cross-references to the questions. Where questions pertain to means of egress, indicate the path of egress on the drawings with arrows.
2.   To cover fees, include a check made out to the Department of Building Inspection (See FEES below).
3.   Address requests to:
      Manager, Permit Services
      Department of Building Inspection
      49 South Van Ness, 4th Floor
      San Francisco, CA 94103
   Indicate on the outside of the envelope: Pre-Application/Pre-Addendum Plan Review Request
4.   Provide several acceptable meeting times of your choice. Allow at least 10 working days for a response to the request for a meeting appointment.
Meeting and Response
5.   The Manager of Plan Review Services will assign your pre-application or pre-addendum plan review request to one of the following section supervisors:
   a.   Structural Plan Review
   b.   Mechanical Plan Review
   c.   Premium Plan Review
   d.   Other Department staff as required
6.   The request for a pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting may result in a meeting or it may result in a letter of response, if that is determined to be appropriate by the responsible Supervisor.
7.   The review will be conducted by the Supervisor of the appropriate section or by other staff as assigned. One or more plan reviewers from Department of Building Inspection staff may be assigned to participate in the pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting depending on the complexity of the project and the issues raised. When necessary, representatives from other agencies such as the San Francisco Fire Department, Department of Public Works, Department of Public Health, Planning Department, or the Redevelopment Agency may be requested to attend.
8.   The Department representative will have final authority to determine which questions are addressed. Questions which are determined to be too broad in scope may be deleted from the agenda. Discussion will be limited to the items on the agenda.
9.   The Department may request additional information from the project sponsor in preparation for a pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting or as a follow-up to such a meeting.
10.   At the beginning of a meeting the project sponsor will be advised of the time allowed before additional plan review fees will be charged. A typical pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting, depending on the complexity of the project or issue, can be covered adequately in 2 hours or less of meeting time.
11.   A Department of Building Inspection staff member or the project sponsor will be designated to take notes during the meeting. If the size or location of the meeting warrants, the Department representative may request that a third party take the notes. Notes shall be taken on a standard form provided by DBI. At the conclusion of the meeting a copy of the notes taken during the meeting will be provided to the principal attendees. Those notes, which record the findings and agreements of the meeting, are to be signed by a Department of Building Inspection representative, by representatives of other departments as applicable, and by the project sponsor. Questions or topics not acknowledged in these notes will not be considered as part of the pre-application or pre-addendum plan review agreements. Alternatively, the Department may choose to issue a letter following the meeting. Such letter or other written communication shall be prepared by Department staff or the project sponsor within 10 working days of the conclusion of the meeting. Within 10 working days of receipt of such letter, the DBI staff will review and return the letter, signed, as “approved,” “approved with conditions,” or “disapproved.” The letter shall state the reasons for such determinations. DBI will track the time of issuance and approval of such letters to confirm that the above time limits are met.
12.   For clarity, each item number of the written response shall correspond to the item number on the agenda.
13.   Any notes, annotated drawings and other documents from the meeting may be attached to the notes or letter of agreement and submitted by the project sponsor for reference at the time of permit or addendum application.
14.   The project sponsor shall attach a copy of the signed conclusions of the pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting, or the letter of response in lieu of meeting, to the permit application or addendum drawings. These decisions will be honored by the responsible plan reviewer during the plan review process and subsequently by field inspection staff.
15.   The project sponsor may request a review of the determination of the staff of the Department of Building Inspection by the Manager of Plan Review Services or the Director. Determinations of the Director may be appealed to the Building Inspection Commission. Certain issues related to alternate methods and materials and technical equivalencies may be appealed to the Board of Examiners.
16.   In the event the code provisions referenced by the application are substantively revised prior to filing for permit, the applicant will be required to submit for a new pre-application plan review meeting.
FEES:
17.   Fee Schedule:
   a.   Fees for initial and each subsequent meeting for a pre-application or pre-addendum plan review meeting are as noted in the latest edition of the San Francisco Building Code Fee Schedule, Table 1A-B, Item 5, Pre-application Plan Review Fee. This fee covers a review of the submitted documents, research, formulating a response, and the meeting itself. The meeting time shall not exceed a total of two hours under this base fee.
   b.   Additional meeting time beyond two hours for both pre-application and pre-addendum meetings is to be charged on a per person, hourly basis per San Francisco Building Code, Table 1A-D, Item 1.
   c.   The San Francisco Fire Department charges plan review fees in addition to the above fees when Fire Department personnel are included in a meeting.
18.   Fees, in addition to the pre-application plan review fee paid in advance, will be calculated at the conclusion of the meeting. Notes or letters of agreement will not be released by the Department until all pre-application or pre-addendum plan review fees are paid.
19.   If the initial pre-application or pre-addendum plan review fee is paid but no such meeting is subsequently held and no preparatory work has been done, the fee may be refunded upon written request by the project sponsor and agreement by the Department.
Revision signed by:
Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O, Acting Director      April 3, 2013
Revision signed by:
Thomas Harvey, Fire Marshal         March 28, 2013
Originally approved by the Building Inspection Commission on September 18, 2002, revision approved March 20, 2013
Attachment: Sample Question
AB-031 Identification of Revisions on Pages of Drawings
 
NO. AB-031   :
	
 


DATE   :
	
June 21, 1984 (Updated 01/01/2023 for code references)


SUBJECT   :
	
Plan Review


TITLE   :
	
Identification of Revisions on Pages of Drawings


PURPOSE   :
	
Information on submittal documents, including revised drawings, shall be in conformity with the San Francisco Building Code and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed.


REFERENCE   :
	
Current edition of the San Francisco Building Code, Section 106A.3.2


DISCUSSION   :
	
Revisions to submittal documents pending review and approval by the Department should be clearly identified on the revised sheets to facilitate review, to reduce discrepancies in the review and to speed the review process. Revisions are to be identified by one of the following methods:
 
   1.   Revisions to portions of a page shall be marked by identifying the change with arrows or encircling the change with a “cloud” symbol. The title block should be marked with the date and number of the revision. Notation of the date may be placed near the change in addition to the title block.
   2.   If an entire page is changed, the title block should be so marked, noting the date and number of revisions.
If a second or third revision is made on a page already containing a revision, the previous revision symbol or markings shall be removed, however, the title block should note the number and date of the revisions.
Originally signed by:
Robert C. Levy, Superintendent, BBI
AB-032 Site Permit Processing
 
NO. AB-032   :
	
 


DATE   :
	
November 16, 2016 (Updated for code references 1/01/2023, supersedes AB-032 dated 6/04/2012)


SUBJECT   :
	
Permit Process


TITLE   :
	
Site Permit Processing


PURPOSE   :
	
To allow work to begin on a construction project before all plans and other submittal documents have been submitted.


REFERENCE   :
	
Current edition of the San Francisco Building Code
   - AB-082 - Guidelines and Procedures for Structural, Geotechnical, and Seismic Hazard Engineering Design Review
   - AB-093 - Implementation of Green Building Regulations


DISCUSSION   :
	
The San Francisco Building Code (SFBC) under Section 106A.3.4.2 allows the application for, and the issuance of, a SITE PERMIT. This permit is issued upon the review and approval of conceptual design drawings and related specifications and documentation.
 
Construction work at the site is controlled and scheduled through the Site Permit process by the submission and approval of a series of segmented phased construction plans identified as addenda. Plans submitted under each addendum shall clearly contain details sufficient to enable plan review, fabrication in the field, and inspection confirmation. Only work shown on approved addenda plans bearing the Department “Stamp of approval” as specified in SFBC Section 106A.4.1 shall be permitted to proceed at the site. Those approved addenda plans and specifications shall be kept available on the site per SFBC Section 106A.4.2 for the use of the inspectors. It is recommended that subcontractors check their shop drawings with the approved addenda kept on site to confirm that their portion of the work has been approved.
Work in progress beyond that shown on the approved addendum or addenda or the failure to display and make available the approved plans at the site shall result in stoppage of work.
1.   DEFINITIONS (See Section 7 for additional information)
   a.   Grading Addendum. This package shall include grading, excavation, and shoring drawings; shoring calculations, completed special inspection and observation form; and geotechnical review letter and report. Grading is defined by Appendix J in the San Francisco Building Code. Permanent cantilever retaining walls may be included, if not part of the building, when clearly shown and completely detailed on the plans. Excavation, shoring, lagging and bracing may be included as part of this addendum, or under separate permit. When tie-back anchors extend onto adjoining property, formal written permission granted by the adjoining owner is required. A separate permit is required for underpinning of each building on adjoining property. The Site Permit applicant is cautioned to provide reasonable notice to adjoining owners of intent to excavate per California Civil Code Section 832. Demolition of buildings on the site will require separate permits per SFBC Section 106A.
   b.   Foundation Addendum. This addendum includes piles, pile caps, spread footings, line footings, grade and tie beams, and slabs on grade and underground utilities as applicable. Cantilever retaining and basement walls not more than one story above grade may be included when clearly shown on the plans. Suspended slabs not more than one story above grade may be considered as part of the foundation addendum when no structural steel work is included.
   c.   Superstructure Addendum. Work for this addendum includes the erection of the basic building and structural frame, providing fireproofing, constructing floors, structural wall systems, stairs and stair shafts.
   The exterior skin shall be included for structural and energy compliance. Structural details and calculations for fabrication, erection and fastening shall be provided. Loading points on beams, girders and columns shall be considered, support details designed, and shown on the drawings. California Code of Regulations (CCR) Title 24, Part 6, energy compliance shall be submitted, but only the building envelope will be approved under this addendum. Building envelope details must be confirmed with CCR Title 24, Part 6 documentation.
   Unless the Mechanical and Electrical System addendum is incorporated with the Super-structure addendum, mechanical and electrical systems shall only include partial installations limited to riser or portions of systems that are physically restrained and locked in by the construction of the building structure. Only stub-outs from riser trunk lines to receive connections from lateral branch lines may be installed under this addendum. Standpipes shall be installed per SFBC Section 905 during erection for purposes of fire protection. These works are permitted but will not be approved unless calculations and supportive documentation are submitted for plan check review and accepted.
   Lateral or branch lines, ducts, piping, wiring, machinery and equipment installation are not permitted nor approved until the Mechanical and Electrical System addendum, but may be shown and included in the Superstructure addendum plan submittal and need not be masked out. If such work is shown on this addendum, there shall be a general note on the cover sheet of the set stating “No installation of lateral electrical or mechanical lines” or some such equivalent statement. Exceptions requiring installation shall also require documentation review and shall be declared and described in the approved addenda schedule and noted specifically as an exception on the plans under the general note previously mentioned prohibiting such installation. Extensive use of such exceptions shall be accommodated through combining the Mechanical and Electrical System addendum into the Superstructure addendum. All mechanical and electrical work must have related plumbing and electrical permits. Closure for walls, floors and shafts where mechanical and electrical systems are installed shall only occur after proper inspection and approval.
   d.   Mechanical & Electrical Systems Addendum - Including Life Safety. This addendum includes all of the mechanical and electrical work within the building except that inclusive in the Superstructure and the Final addendum. Typical work includes the sprinkler systems, HVAC systems, smoke evacuation and control systems, emergency lighting and power, fire alarms and warning device systems, voice enunciation and communication systems, boilers, lighting, and central control station installation.
   Full design plans including energy calculations and acoustic report if applicable are to be submitted. Where schematic plans are submitted, typical details for installation should be provided. For example, typical hangers, struts, sleeves, packing and seismic restraints should be shown for sprinkler system installations. Full documentation shall be submitted for review at this time. Included as part of this documentation will be the compliance as required by SFBC Chapter 16 for seismic consideration for those systems shown.
   e.   Final Addendum. This addendum includes all work excluded under the Superstructure and the Mechanical and Electrical system addenda.
   f.   Addendum is the grouping of desired work into one single phase of construction.
   g.   Addenda is the plural of addendum. (See Section 6 for Addenda Submittal and Section 8 for Processing of Site Permit Addenda).
   h.   Addenda Schedule is the proposed division of work into a logical sequence of addenda that aligns with the project’s construction sequences that collectively carries it through to completion. (See Section 7 for Approval of Sequence of Partial Construction Phases).
   i.   Approved Addenda Schedule shall be the addenda schedule listing the acceptable sequence of work phases approved by DBI. Approval will be given upon submission of a letter request from the applicant. The request letter for an approved addenda schedule may be submitted after the issuance of site permit and prior to, or jointly with, the submittal of the first addendum.
   j.   Approved Addendum is an addendum that has been submitted to the Department for review, checked and approved. The addendum plans shall bear the Department stamp of approval as described in SFBC Section 106A.4.1 and one set shall be kept at the work site as required by SFBC Section 106A.4.2. Work shall not proceed on the site until such time that approved addendum plans indicating work permitted are on site and available. Each approved addendum shall be considered as a permit.
   k.   Site Permit is a permit issued upon the approval of a building permit application based on preliminary drawings and documentation. The Site Permit plans shall describe the exterior of the building in sufficient detail and dimensioned to mark heights, lengths, and widths. Court sizes, openings, and other significant projections or recesses shall be located, sized, and dimensioned. The interior shall indicate the Means of Egress systems, fire separations that may be required for major building or area separations and for occupancy separations greater than one hour. Property lines, both real and assumed in cases of multi-buildings, shall be clearly delineated as well as type of construction and other forms of basic information to establish the design intent. Approval and issuance of a site permit alone does not allow for construction. Additional construction documents submitted and approved as addenda, complete the set of approved construction documents. (See Section 4 for Site Permit Submittal Package and Section 5 for Site Permit Review Process).
   l.   Altered Site Permit is an alteration application to effectively retire the Site Permit issued under the original permit application and activate an alternate Site Permit as the sole survivor. A new approved addenda schedule must be issued for the Altered Site Permit. Work described in addenda approved under the original Site Permit may be carried forward onto the Altered Site Permit addenda schedule. An Altered Site Permit will be required only in those cases where a major change affects the concept of the original Site Permit. A typical example may be to add or delete stories to the building.
2.   SITE PERMIT PROCESS
A Site Permit may be filed at Central Permit Bureau (CPB) for a new building or, if the size of the project warrants, an alteration to an existing building. Permit Processing Center (PPC) will be the central coordinating review agency for all Site Permit applications and their attendant addenda.
3.   MARKINGS OF PLAN
   a.   All plans submitted for Site Permit shall be clearly marked by CPB staff on the front of each plan sheet as follows:
 
   SITE PERMIT
THIS APPLICATION SUBMITTED FOR SITE PERMIT ONLY. NO WORK MAY BE STARTED UNTIL CONSTRUCTION PLANS HAVE BEEN APPROVED.
 
   b.   All plans submitted for partial construction as Addenda to a Site Permit shall be clearly marked by CPB staff on the front of each plan sheet as follows:
 
   ADDENDUM #_____
SITE PERMIT ADDENDUM FOR CONSTRUCTION OF:
___________________________________
 
 
   Addendum routing forms will be supplied by the CPB staff for completion by the APPLICANT.
4.   SITE PERMIT SUBMITTAL PACKAGE
The Site Permit submittal package shall include completed permit application form and 2 sets of the following (as a minimum):
   a.   Architectural Plans. Architectural plans shall include plot plan, floor plans (existing and new), sections and elevations to describe the general scope of work.
   b.   Topographic Site Survey. For new construction or horizontal additions on sloping sites, the site permit submittal package shall include a topographic site survey.
   c.   Smoke Control Report. For new high-rise construction (more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access), the site permit package shall include a preliminary smoke control report.
   d.   Structural Design Criteria Document. For projects subject to Structural Design Review per AB-082, the site permit submittal package shall include the Structural Design Criteria Documents as separately detailed by the Department of Building Inspection.
   e.   Green Building Submittal. For projects subject to green building regulations, see AB-093.
NOTE: Acoustical Analysis Report will not be required at Site Permit Submittal. The report will be required at Addenda Submittal if triggered by SFBC Section 1206.
Contact other Departments for additional materials required.
5.   SITE PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS
The Plan Checker shall review the site permit for major architectural/life safety and accessibility issues. The following shall be included for Site Permit review:
   a.   Building Information & Data: Describe the scope of work, use and occupancy group classifications, construction type, number of stories and basements, height, and sprinkler provisions. List all applicable codes including the applicable version.
   b.   Allowable Height, Story and Area: Provide computations to document analysis. Include sprinkler and area modification provisions where applicable.
   For mixed occupancies, state for the building or portions thereof, the method of compliance, applying accessory occupancies, non-separated occupancies, or separated occupancies where applicable. Tabulate the actual and allowable height, story and area.
   For new buildings, tabulate the gross area for all basements and stories individually and provide a summation of the total building area.
   For alterations with vertical and/or horizontal additions, tabulate the gross area for the existing building and for the additional area (or reduced area). Provide these values for all basements and stories individually. Provide a summation of the total building area.
   c.   Exterior Wall and Opening Protection: Provide a plot plan locating the building, adjoining properties and buildings, and public ways. Locate and dimension property lines, both real and assumed in cases of two or more buildings on the same lot regulated as separate buildings.
   Dimension the Fire Separation Distance (FSD) for all exterior walls and openings adjacent to property lines. Tabulate the total area of unprotected and protected openings per story. Tabulate the actual and allowable percentages comparison for each opening type, per story. Indicate the rating for required fire-resistive exterior walls.
   d.   Means of Egress (MOE): Provide occupant loads and analysis of the MOE system. Include diagonal dimensions of spaces requiring two or more exits and the exit separation distances. Provide diagonal dimensions of each story or portion thereof requiring two or more exits and the exit separation distances. From the most remote point in a story or portion thereof to an exit, document exit access travel distances. Where applicable, document the common path of egress travel distance from the most remote point in a space, in a story or portion thereof. Travel distances shall be measured rectilinearly at right angles except where the direction of travel is guided by walls or other permanent architectural features.
   e.   Fire-Resistance Elements and Ratings: Identify by legend or other graphical methods, location of fire-resistance vertical and horizontal assemblies required for the separation of occupancies, building portions, area limits, shaft enclosures, exit enclosures, incidental accessory occupancies, and other adjacent spaces. Include the fire-resistance rating for each of these elements.
   f.   Emergency Escape and Rescue: Where applicable, provide compliant exterior emergency escape and rescue openings. Such openings shall align with the information documented on exterior building elevations approved by the Planning Department. Changes affecting the exterior design subsequent to Planning Department approval will necessitate rerouting the Site Permit to that department for additional review.
   g.   Accessibility: Buildings and sites for covered residential occupancies, public buildings, public accommodations, commercial buildings and publicly funded housing shall be accessible to persons with disabilities. The Site Permit shall provide sufficient details to document the accessible exterior route of travel, general accessibility for entrances, exits and paths of travel, accessible Means of Egress, and common use facilities, such as parking and restrooms. (Review by the Mayor’s Office on Disability is not required at site permit review stage, but is required prior to review of the architectural addendum.)
   h.   Estimated Construction Valuation: Determine the estimated construction cost.
   i.   SFUSD Fee: Determine the areas required for the calculation of SFUSD fees.
Inasmuch as the purpose of a Site Permit is to allow review of preliminary conceptual and schematic designs of proposed construction, there is no detailed plan review of construction details required at the time of Site Permit review. Such detailed review will be done at the time of addendum review.
The purpose of DBI’s plan review of Site Permits is to assure that there are no major factors that would preclude the detailed design of a code-complying structure.
The Plans Checker shall determine whether or not the Planning Department should review any changes resulting from the rechecks. As a minimum, drawings showing floor plans and elevations should have a Planning Department approval stamp.
6.   ADDENDA SUBMITTAL
The Applicant shall submit an addenda schedule prior to, or jointly with, the submittal of the first addendum. This addenda schedule shall be retained in PPC and distributed with the plans to the various review agencies/disciplines. All addenda shall be submitted at CPB. The scope of work for each addendum shall be clearly indicated on the cover sheet. Addenda can be submitted at any time after issuance of the site permit. No addendum package can be submitted before site permit is issued.
Addenda application form, 2 sets of plans for the addenda and 1 reference copy of complete set of issued Site Permit plans shall be submitted.
7.   APPROVAL OF SEQUENCE OF PARTIAL CONSTRUCTION PHASES
The APPLICANT shall secure written approval from the Director of this proposed division of work as the Approved Addenda Schedule defined in Item i of the DEFINITIONS above. The request shall itemize and clearly define the extent sought under each Addendum, such as:
   Addendum 1 - Grading
   Addendum 2 - Foundation
   Addendum 3 - Superstructure
   Addendum 4 - Final
The description of work for typical addenda is normally taken from the DEFINITIONS. If, for particular reasons, an applicant wishes to vary the work within addenda definitions, the exact work description shall be indicated in the Addenda Schedule request and, if approved, shall likewise be shown in the approved Addenda Schedule.
Acceptable phasing will be approved by the Director by confirmatory letter. Such approval must be obtained before the first Addendum plans of a sequence are filed. An addenda submitted to our Department shall have the contents of the Approved Addenda Schedule for the particular Addendum noted on the first plan sheet of the Addendum set.
The APPLICANT is cautioned to submit the Addendum plans sufficiently early to permit processing and approval before any construction covered by such Addendum is scheduled. It must be recognized that construction covered by successive Addenda is generally overlapping and not sequential.
The applicant may file more than one addendum at a time, but un-issued active addenda within the approval review process may not number more than three at any time, unless otherwise approved.
8.   PROCESSING OF SITE PERMIT ADDENDA
DBI STAFF will verify at the time Site Permit Addenda are filed:
   a.   that the Applicant has confirmatory letter from the Director approving the proposed sequence of construction phases and that the notes on the front sheet of the Addendum show the contents of work indicated on the Approval Addenda Schedule;
   b.   unless otherwise approved, there are not more than three un-issued addenda in the Department;
   c.   that the front of each sheet has been marked by Applicant as described above;
   d.   that Addendum routing forms to accompany plans have been completely filled out in duplicate.
DBI STAFF will mark outside of roll of plans with:
   a.   Application number;
   b.   Date stamp;
   c.   Description of phase of work covered by Addendum, by stamp if appropriate.
If revisions to the Addendum plans are necessary, they will be submitted as revised plans. Such revised plans will also be stamped with the phase of work to be done unless those revisions are subsequent to an Approved Addendum, in which case an alteration permit will be required.
All Site Permits Addenda will be routed directly to PPC. PPC will receive the Addendum from the staff and will determine the further routing. The routing will be accomplished by checking the appropriate boxes on the Addendum routing form. The PLAN CHECKER will also verify, before approving same, that all plan sheets and Addendum routing forms have been marked as described above.
The PLAN CHECKER shall verify that any required letters of permission by adjoining owners for tie-back installation have been scanned on plans as part of the GRADING Addendum documents.
The PLAN CHECKER will review the plans and approve them by signing the Addendum routing form noting whatever conditions are required for approval, as would be done for any permit application. When all required approvals have been obtained, the plans and Addendum routing forms will be returned to the PPC staff.
PPC STAFF will verify that all required approvals have been obtained, and will then route to CPB. CPB will then notify the Applicant. In no event will any Addendum be submitted until the original Site Permit has been issued. After the Applicant has signed for the stipulations, he will receive one copy of the approved plans and Addendum routing form to be kept on the job with his original plans and Site Permit application. The CPB STAFF will forward the office copy of the approved Addendum routing form and the Addendum to the Records Management Division.
Signed by:
Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.O.         11/16/2016
Director
Department of Building Inspection
Approved by the Building Inspection Commission 11/16/2016
AB-035 Procedure for Assigning Street Numbers (Addresses)
 
NO. AB-035   :
	
 


DATE   :
	
January 19, 2011 (updated 01/01/2023 for code references)
(supersedes Administrative Bulletin AB-035 issued September 18, 2002)


SUBJECT   :
	
General Administrative Procedures


TITLE   :
	
Procedure for Assigning Street Numbers (Addresses)


PURPOSE   :
	
To establish a procedure for assigning and/or changing street numbers (addresses) to new buildings, tenant space street entrances, new parcels, vacant lots, and any other street addressing need of the City and County of San Francisco.


REFERENCE   :
	
Current edition of the San Francisco Building Code
   - Section 107A.10, Building Numbers and Fees
   - Table 1A-J, Miscellaneous Fees


DISCUSSION   :
	
Every project sponsor shall obtain an official street number prior to the submittal of a building permit application when the work consists of a new building or a new street entrance to a new tenant space or dwelling unit in an existing building. Every residential property owner shall request in writing and receive approval from the Building Official for a change in a street number assignment. The following procedures shall apply to the assignment and/or change of street numbers.
 
Entrances to be Numbered
All primary entrances from the street to all buildings and all direct entrances from the street to separate tenant spaces or dwelling units shall be numbered. Only the building number officially assigned by the Building Official may be displayed on the building.
The numbers shall be placed on the front of the building adjacent to the entrance so as to be easily seen from the street. The street numbers assigned shall be placed on the building in a place and manner acceptable to the Building Official in accordance with Section 107A.10 of the San Francisco Building Code.
[Historical Note: The following procedures for assigning street numbers are long term provisions of San Francisco codes. These procedures have been brought forward from the 1909 San Francisco Building Code through subsequent editions of that code.]
Method of Numbering
Market Street shall be the starting point for the numbers of all buildings fronting on the streets beginning thereon and running therefrom in any direction. On Webster, Fillmore, Steiner, Pierce, Scott, Divisadero, Broderick, Baker and Lyon Streets, and Central Avenue, and streets in the Sunnyside, Lakeview, Railroad Homestead and City Land Association tracts, the numbering shall begin at their southerly ends and proceed toward the north.
On all streets having a northerly and southerly course, diverging less than 45 degrees from a northerly and southerly course and not otherwise provided for, the numbering shall begin at their northerly ends and proceed toward the south. On all streets having an easterly and westerly course, or diverging less than 45 degrees from an easterly and westerly course, the numbering shall begin at their easterly ends and proceed toward the west, except that on streets lying south of Cesar Chavez [Army Street] and running from Mission in an easterly or southerly direction, and also on [Bernal Avenue], Montezuma and Aztec Streets, Esmeralda Avenue, [and on streets in Gift Maps 1 and 2], the numbering shall start at their westerly ends and proceed toward the east. On all intermediate subdivision streets, the numbering shall commence where the streets begin and proceed in the same direction as the numbering on the principal streets between which they lie.
[Note: Street and place names which are shown in brackets no longer exist or have been renamed.]
Even and Odd Numbers
On all streets the numbers on the right hand side, starting from the point of beginning, shall be even numbers, and the numbers on the left hand side shall be odd numbers; except that on all streets having a northerly and southerly course, and lying west of Central Avenue and Presidio Avenue but not including Central Avenue, the numbers on the right hand side, starting from the point of beginning, shall be odd numbers and the numbers on the left hand side shall be even numbers.
Allotment of Numbers
One hundred numbers, or as many thereof as may be necessary, shall be allotted to the property frontage in each block between two main streets. The number 100 shall be the first number on the right hand side, and the number 101 the first number on the left hand side of the second block of all streets, except those lying west of Central Avenue and Presidio Avenue, but not including Central Avenue. The succeeding hundreds shall be allotted in a similar manner consecutively in each succeeding block, except that on Mission, Natoma, Howard, Folsom, Harrison, Bryant, Jackson, Pacific, Broadway, Vallejo, Green, Union, Francisco, Bay and Webster Streets, and on Central Avenue, 100 numbers shall be allotted to the first two blocks. One hundred numbers shall also be allotted on Divisadero Street between Waller and Page Streets. When a block exceeds 850 feet in length, 200 numbers shall be allotted to it.
For the purpose of preserving uniformity in the numbering along Market Street, so that the numbers on both sides of the street shall conform as nearly as possible, 50 even numbers shall be allotted to each of the following apportionments of frontage along the northerly side of Market Street: between the westerly line of Spear Street, proceeding northerly, and the easterly line of Drumm Street; between Battery and Montgomery Streets; between Kearny and Stockton Streets; between Powell and Taylor Streets; and between Jones Street and [Marshall Square].
Fifty odd numbers shall be allotted to each of the following apportionments of frontage along the southerly side of Market Street: between Embarcadero and Spear Street; between Twelfth and Valencia Streets; between Guerrero and Dolores Streets; and between Church and Sanchez Streets.
When any street fails in its course to traverse certain blocks, 100 numbers shall be allotted to each block not traversed, in the same manner as if the street were continuous. When any street is intersected on its opposite sides by different streets, the hundreds on one side shall be made to correspond as closely as possible to the hundreds on the opposite side by allotting only 25 numbers, even or odd as the case may require, to the side which the blocks are shorter.
One number shall be allowed for each one-fiftieth (1/50) of the frontage of each block between two main streets, except in blocks having a frontage of less than 400 feet where the allowance shall be made on the basis of one number to every eight feet of frontage.
Renumbering
Any Property Owner may request a change to an existing street number assignment. Approval of the request for change to an existing street number assignment shall not be denied if such request can reasonably be granted. A request in writing must be made to the Building Official requesting a change to the existing street number assignment. Proof of property ownership must be submitted if requested by the Building Official and any other information as needed for determination of request approval.
If a property is tenant-occupied, the property owner must also submit documentation acceptable to the Building Official that all tenants have been notified of the proposed street number change request.
Nothing in this bulletin shall authorize the renumbering of any block which is now uniformly numbered in accordance with any previous law, unless such renumbering is made necessary by the construction or alterations of buildings whereby the number of entrances to buildings on such blocks has been so increased as to prevent consecutive numbering.
Responsibilities
Building Official
The Building Official shall notify all applicable Federal, State, County, City and local agencies requesting and/or requiring notification of new and/or changed street number assignments. The Building Official shall also provide the property owner with an approved and issued street number assignment permit.
Property Owner/Project Sponsor
The property owner/project sponsor must notify all private entities and tenants of the issued street number assignment. The property owner must properly identify the affected building(s) as provided in Section 107A.10 of the San Francisco Building Code within 60 days of the issued street number assignment but no sooner than 10 days to allow for proper notification to others.
Notice to be Given
Whenever any violation of the provisions of this bulletin relating to the numbering of buildings exists, notice thereof shall be given to the owner, or if they cannot be found, to the occupant of the premises where the violation occurs. If, after two weeks, the cause of complaint has not been removed, the provisions detailed in Section 103A of the San Francisco Building Code shall be applied.
Temporary Retention of Old Numbers
Whenever any property owner has been notified to change the numbers of his building, the old numbers may be temporarily retained, in addition to the new numbers, but in no case shall the old numbers be retained for more than sixty (60) days after the official notice to change them.
Fees
The fee for each numbered building entrance is shown in Section 110A, Table 1A-J of the San Francisco Building Code.
Signed by:
Vivian L. Day, C.B.O.         
Director
Department of Building Inspection
Approved by the Building Inspection Commission on September 18, 2002,
Revision approved January 19, 2011.
AB-036 Special Inspection for Demolition Work
 
NO. AB-036   :
	
 


DATE   :
	
October 20, 1993 (Updated 01/01/2023 for code references)


SUBJECT   :
	
Inspection


TITLE   :
	
Special Inspection for Demolition Work


PURPOSE   :
	
For demolition of buildings of Types I, II, III and IV construction, and which are over 2 stories or 25 feet in height, a special inspector shall be on the site to observe and/or supervise the work to assure it is proceeding in a safe manner.


REFERENCE   :
	
Current edition of the San Francisco Building Code
   - 1705.21, Demolition
   - 3307, Protection of Adjoining Property
   - 3303.8, Special Inspection


DISCUSSION   :
	
Demolition work creates ongoing, and often sudden, life hazards. The general requirements for special inspection in San Francisco Building Code Section 1705.21, are made more specific in this ruling to reflect the need for extra supervision of such work.
 
Requirement
The Demolition Contractor or permit applicant shall identify the Special Inspector for demolition work before a demolition permit is issued. For buildings over 6 stories in height, the Contractor and Special Inspector shall meet with the Department of Building Inspection (DBI) District Inspector to review the demolition work and arrive at a clear understanding on what is expected of all parties prior to the start of work. The Demolition Contractor shall notify the Special Inspector and the District Inspector at least two days prior to the start of the demolition operations. By obtaining the permit, the applicant acknowledges the authority of the Special Inspector over the demolition work as described below.
The Special Inspector:
1.   Shall be a registered Civil Engineer or licensed Architect, and preferably, the individual who prepared the approved demolition sequence. The Special Inspector shall be at the site at all times when dismantling or demolition work is proceeding on any component which, when removed, reduces the stability of the building. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
   a.   Exterior walls
   b.   Bearing walls
   c.   Beams, girders and columns
   d.   Diaphragms (roof and floors which contribute stability to building)
2.   Shall observe and/or direct that the work conforms with the sequence of operations which was approved by DBI. In the event a potentially hazardous situation develops as a result of conditions uncovered or unintentionally created by the demolition work, the Special Inspector shall notify DBI by telephone as soon as possible, and at that point shall require and allow only corrective work to take place to substantially reduce the hazards present. The Special Inspector shall then not allow any more work to be done until a revised demolition sequence has been submitted to DBI and approved.
   In the event an unexpected development occurs which jeopardizes the public, such as materials falling onto the street or partial collapse of a wall, the Special Inspector may allow the demolition work to continue only if all the following conditions are complied with:
   a.   No continuing hazards to the public exist after the incident.
   b.   No significant deviations from the approved sequence are necessary as a result of the incident.
   c.   The Contractor provides/establishes measures and assurances that such incidents will not occur again, to the satisfaction of the Inspector.
   d.   The Special Inspector reports the incident to DBI in writing as soon as possible. The report shall explicitly address the issues in conditions a through c above.
   If the above conditions are not met, the Special Inspector shall stop the job and notify DBI. The Special Inspector shall not allow the work to resume until DBI gives permission.
   In the event deviations from the approved sequence are necessary due to unexpected field conditions, and potentially hazardous conditions are not present or would not be created, the inspector may allow or direct such deviations be made without stopping the work. Such deviations shall be reported in his next report to DBI.
3.   Shall make written reports to DBI on a weekly basis or as required by DBI. Such reports shall include information on the progress of the demolition, any deviations which were not reported previously, and a statement that the demolition work is adhering to the approved sequence.
4.   May be an employee of the Special Inspector only when the following conditions are complied with:
   a.   The employee is a registered Civil Engineer or licensed Architect.
   b.   The employee shall be under the immediate supervision of the Special Inspector. The Special Inspector shall provide to DBI a written statement in which he acknowledges complete responsibility for the inspection work, actions and decisions of the employee.
   c.   All reports shall be signed by the Engineer or Architect.
Originally signed by:
Dot Y. Yee, Deputy Superintendent
