AB-110 Building Façade Inspection and Maintenance
NO. AB-110:     
DATE:          August 21, 2024
SUBJECT:       Permit Review and Operations
TITLE:         Building Façade Inspection and Maintenance
               The purpose of this bulletin is to establish policies for implementing San
PURPOSE:       Francisco Existing Building Code
               Chapter 5F regarding building façade inspection and maintenance.
               San Francisco Building Code (SFBC), Current Edition
               San Francisco Existing Building Code (SFEBC),
               Chapter 5F, Building Façade Inspection and Maintenance – Retroactive Provisions
               California Historical Building Code, Current Edition
               San Francisco Planning Code, Articles 10 and 11, as well as properties defined
REFERENCE:     as Category A – Historic Resource Present.
               American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) E2270-14 Standard Practice
               for Periodic Inspection of Building Facades for Unsafe Conditions
               ASTM E2841-19 Standard Guide for Conducting Inspections of Building Façades for
               Unsafe Conditions
               Code of Federal Regulations, Part 61, Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
               the Treatment of Historic Properties
               The Building Façade Inspection & Maintenance Program was established by
               Ordinance 67-16 which amended the 2016 San Francisco Existing Building Code to
               require certain San Francisco building facades be regularly inspected by a
               California licensed architect or engineer and maintained. The program was
               subsequently updated by Ordinances 97-23 and 16-24 which amended the 2022 San
               Francisco Existing Building Code. The inspections are meant to ensure public
BACKGROUND:    safety and reduce the risk of death or injury resulting from deteriorated
               building façade elements falling onto streets and sidewalks below. The
               inspection and maintenance work are to be documented in a report submitted to
               the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection. After the initial
               inspection, buildings must be inspected, and reports submitted every five
               years, alternating between a detailed comprehensive inspection and a general
               supplemental inspection.
               San Francisco Existing Building Code
               Chapter 5F requires that building façades undergo initial and subsequent
               inspections according to a schedule based on the original construction date of
               a building. These inspections, as well as reporting and maintenance, are to be
               done as detailed in this Administrative Bulletin and in accordance with the San
               Francisco Existing Building Code (SFEBC). SFEBC Section
               504F.1 specifies that the basis for inspection and reporting is ASTM E2270
               Standard Practice for Periodic Inspection of Building Facades for Unsafe
DISCUSSION:    Conditions, as modified and interpreted by this Administrative Bulletin. The
               report due dates are as specified in SFEBC Section
               503F. Facade inspections are primarily intended to identify unsafe conditions
               that could jeopardize public safety and to identify other conditions that could
               deteriorate into unsafe conditions before the next scheduled inspection. The
               intent of
               Chapter 5F is to verify that façade elements and systems are maintained to
               perform in accordance with the code under which they were installed or
               improved.
               All buildings that are five or more stories and of construction Type I, II,
               III, or IV are required to have comprehensive facade inspection and maintenance
               undertaken in accordance with San Francisco Existing Building Code
APPLICABILITY: Chapters 5F and this Administrative Bulletin. Among the buildings requiring
               comprehensive façade inspections, those of 15 or more stories are additionally
               required to have supplemental façade inspections undertaken in accordance with
               San Francisco Existing Building Code
               Chapter 5F and this Administrative Bulletin.
 
I.   INSPECTORS
   A.   Required façade inspection and maintenance shall be performed under the
direct supervision of a qualified professional. The qualified professional
shall be a California licensed architect or engineer, retained by the property
owner. The qualified professional shall oversee all work of qualified
inspectors and all reporting.
   B.   For inspection of buildings considered historic resources, the
qualified professional shall have expertise in inspection and maintenance of
historic resources. Such expertise must include a documented history of
successful projects, detailed investigations of historic structures, and the
preparation of recommendations or repair documents. All work must be in
accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties: Standards for Rehabilitation.
II.   INSPECTION STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
   A.   To meet the requirements of SFEBC
Chapter 5F, the provisions of ASTM E2270-14 Standard Practice for Periodic
Inspection of Building Facades for Unsafe Conditions, shall apply as modified
by this Administrative Bulletin. Subsequent revisions of ASTM E2270 may apply
if specifically referenced in an updated version of this Administrative
Bulletin or through a directive issued by the Department of Building
Inspection.
   B.   Prior to inspection, the owner should check with SF Planning to
determine whether the building qualifies as a historic resource. Such
information is available on the SF Planning Property Information Map website at
sfplanninggis.org/pim/ or by contacting the SF Planning Preservation Program
staff at the Planning Information Center at 49 South Van Ness Ave, 2nd Floor,
San Francisco, 628-652-7300, or pic@sfgov.org. Special requirements outlined
here apply to buildings defined by SF Planning as Category A – Historic
Resource Present:
      1.   Assessment and recommendations related to facades of historic
resources shall be performed in conformance with the Secretary of the
Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties: Standards for
Rehabilitation.
      2.   Inspection methods for historic resources shall use the least
intrusive or invasive means feasible to effectively assess hidden conditions.
      3.   When practical, building materials removed to allow for detailed
inspection shall be salvaged and reinstalled, or stored by the property owner
for future reinstallation.
      4.   Qualified historic resources may be evaluated using the provisions
in the California Historical Building Code regarding strength, performance,
utilization, and other properties of archaic materials, provided that such
provisions result in acceptable performance as detailed in the SFEBC and in
this Administrative Bulletin.
   C.   Comprehensive façade inspection per SFEBC
Chapter 5F shall be in accordance with ASTM E2270 and clarifications made in
this Administrative Bulletin.
      1.   Comprehensive façade inspections shall be per ASTM E2270 Item 10.3
General Inspection and Item 10.4 Detailed Inspection and shall encompass 100
percent visual inspection and 25 percent tactile inspection of the exterior
façades per ASTM E2270 Table A1.1.
      2.   The qualified professional shall assess the watertight integrity of
the façade by performing a cursory interior leak survey of the exterior facades
per ASTM E2270 Section 9 as well as consulting with the property owner and/or
building manager regarding any locations of known water leakage or
infiltration. This information may be useful in selecting locations for
detailed inspection.
      3.   As part of a detailed inspection, probes, per ASTM E2270, Item
10.4.8, are not mandatory and need not be undertaken unless considered
necessary by the qualified professional. Inspection should include careful
visual inspection of external indicators of façade deterioration before probing
or removing elements to observe concealed façade components.
   D.   Supplemental façade inspection per SFEBC
Chapter 5F shall be in accordance with ASTM E2270, Item 10.3 General
Inspection.
      1.   As part of a supplemental façade inspection, general inspections
under Item 10.3 of ASTM E2270 shall comprise 100 percent visual inspection of
the exterior glazing. The general inspection shall be a visual observation of
exterior glazing system from an appropriate distance with or without
magnification or remote optical devices. The qualified professional shall
methodically scan façade areas and check for out-of-plane displacement,
deterioration and defects of glazing elements, and for glass breakages.
      2.   As part of the supplemental façade inspection, detailed inspections,
per ASTM E2270, Item 10.4, and interior leak survey per ASTM E2270, Item 9, are
not mandatory and need not be undertaken unless considered necessary by the
qualified professional conducting the inspection and reporting.
   E.   Remote sensing techniques, including 3-D survey, remote aerial
vehicles, and other non-traditional inspection methods are considered a “means
and methods” and may be deployed by the qualified professional for achieving
General Inspections under Item 10.3 of ASTM E2270 and this Administrative
Bulletin. All applicable laws and regulations associated with the “means and
methods” for performing the inspections are the responsibility of the qualified
professional. All applicable laws and regulations relating to the operation of
remote vehicles and equipment must be followed.
   F.   Persons conducting building façade inspections are encouraged to review
ASTM E2841 Standard Guide for Conducting Inspections of Building Façades for
Unsafe Conditions. The document provides recommended procedures and
methodologies for conducting inspections of building façades.
III.   INSPECTION WAIVERS OR EXEMPTIONS
   A.   Procedures for obtaining a waiver of the initial comprehensive
inspection based on previous inspection, maintenance work, and report are as
follows:
      1.   To request a waiver of the initial inspection under
Chapter 5F , Section
503F.1, Exception 2, the owner must submit all materials required in a
comprehensive inspection report, as specified in this Administrative Bulletin.
The request must also include documentation of the completed repairs, such as
reports, plans, specifications, and building permits
      2.   A waiver of the initial comprehensive façade inspection may be
requested and granted if the following criteria are met:
         a.   A comprehensive façade inspection and necessary maintenance,
restoration, or replacement was performed and completed within ten years prior
to the initial inspection report due date listed in Table 503F of the SFEBC for
the building’s specific compliance tier.
Where only partial inspection, maintenance, restoration, or replacement was
performed and completed within ten years prior to the inspection due date, the
remaining facades/areas/elements are required to undergo comprehensive façade
inspection to provide for a complete report that thoroughly addresses all
requirements outlined in SFEBC Section
504F and ASTM E2270, and this Administrative Bulletin.
         b.   A complete inspection report meeting the requirements this
Administrative Bulletin must be submitted, reviewed, and accepted.
         c.   Documentation of the scope of completed repairs, such as reports,
plans and specifications, and building permits, is submitted with the
inspection report.
      3.   Special approval of waivers of initial inspection may be approved by
the Department of Building Inspection on a case-by-case basis for other
reasons, such as for previously submitted reports or studies, or for work
undertaken in previous phases.
   B.   A supplemental inspection report shall be submitted in accordance with
the due dates presented in SFEBC
Chapter 5F unless all of the following is confirmed and documented by the
qualified professional in the report compliance affidavit provided in AB-110
Attachment B, each time a supplemental inspection report is due:
      1.   The building contains no spandrel glass.
      2.   The building has maintained a maintenance log documenting all glass
and glazing replacement or repairs. The log shall be available for review by
the qualified professional.
      3.   The building has no history of glass breakage within the last five
years.
IV.   INSPECTION REPORTS, AFFIDAVITS, AND REPORT CONCLUSIONS
   A.   Comprehensive inspection reports must meet the following requirements:
      1.   All comprehensive inspection reports shall include the Comprehensive
Building Facade Inspection Report Compliance Affidavit, as provided in AB-110
Attachment A, completed and signed by both the owner and the qualified
professional.
      2.   A comprehensive façade inspection report shall document the
qualified professional’s inspection findings, observations, discussions,
conclusions and recommendations as required by SFEBC
Chapter 5F , ASTM E2270, and this Administrative Bulletin. The report shall be
written and presented in a clear, well-organized and detailed manner. It shall
have obvious references to photos and sources and be structured in a formal
technical report format. A complete list of requirements is provided in AB-110
Attachment C Comprehensive Façade Inspection Report Submittal Preparation
Checklist, along with a suggested report structure.
      3.   Detailed floor plans, construction details, and other detailed
documentation per ASTM E2270, Item 7 are required only as necessary to
undertake inspection or communicate inspection findings to the property owner
or the Department of Building Inspection. Sufficient building plan information
should be assembled to identify areas of inspection, locations or elements
requiring maintenance work, locations of unsafe conditions and other inspection
findings.
   B.   Supplemental inspection reports must meet the following requirements:
      1.   A supplemental inspection report shall consist of the Supplemental
Building Façade Inspection Report and Compliance Affidavit, as provided in AB-
110 Attachment B, completed and signed by both the property owner and the
qualified professional, with other attachments as necessary. The supplemental
inspection report shall briefly document information, observations,
conclusions, and recommendations as applicable based on SFEBC
Chapter 5F, ASTM E2270, and this Administrative Bulletin and attachments.
      2.   Where the supplemental inspection finds that the condition of the
exterior glass and glazing system is classified as either Conclusion Category 1
Repair/Stabilization following Temporary Mitigation of Unsafe Conditions or
Conclusion Category 2 Requires Repair, Stabilization and Maintenance, or where
broken glass is identified, the report shall describe the nature and extent of
repairs, maintenance, or corrective actions recommended to be performed
immediately or before the next reporting period deadline. The report shall
include descriptions of the conditions observed, possible cause, and
recommended mitigation measures. The report shall include photographs locating
and identifying the conditions. A complete list of requirements is provided in
AB-110 Attachment D Supplemental Façade Inspection Report Submittal Preparation
Checklist.
   C.   Each Comprehensive and Supplemental inspection report shall assign the
overall building to one of the three report conclusion categories described
below. Note that the report conclusion categories described below are
distinguished from façade condition categories defined in ASTM E2270 in that,
the façade conclusion categories are for categorizing the overall building,
whereas the façade condition categories are for categorizing the conditions of
the façade elements. An unsafe condition is not a façade inspection report
conclusion category, but rather a condition that requires immediate
notification and mitigation action as discussed in a subsequent section of this
document.
      1.   Conclusion Category 1 – Repair/Stabilization following Temporary
Mitigation of Unsafe Conditions:
         A building in the category Repair/Stabilization following Temporary
Mitigation of Unsafe Conditions has exhibited deterioration that constituted
one or more unsafe conditions and has undergone actions to mitigate or repair
the unsafe conditions.
         The report shall identify all unsafe conditions addressed in previous
mitigation as well as all other conditions that require repair, stabilization
or maintenance to prevent existing deterioration from progressing to an unsafe
condition before the next required inspection. The report shall recommend
repair/stabilization actions to restore the building to its approved condition
and a timeline for implementation of such repairs. The report shall also
contain general repair and maintenance recommendations.
      2.   Conclusion Category 2 – Requires Repair, Stabilization and
Maintenance:
         A building in the category Requires Repair, Stabilization and
Maintenance exhibits deterioration that, if not repaired, stabilized or
maintained, could progress to an unsafe condition before the next required
inspection.
         The report shall identify building elements that require repair,
stabilization and maintenance before the next required inspection, and shall
include repair recommendations and a timeline for implementation so that the
building performance meets a condition that ensures the building’s safety and
compliance with applicable codes. The report should also contain general repair
and maintenance recommendations.
         The property owner shall follow the recommendations in the report for
stabilization and repair necessary to maintain the façade.
      3.   Conclusion Category 3 – Ordinary Maintenance:
         A building in the category Ordinary Maintenance requires on-going
general repair and maintenance.
The report should make general maintenance and repair recommendations.
V.   ACTIONS BY CITY FOLLOWING SUBMITTAL OF REPORTS
   A.   Within 60 days of receipt of a façade inspection report, the Department
of Building Inspection shall review reports and notify both the owner and the
qualified professional that the report is acceptable as submitted, or provide
comments identifying any revisions or additional information that may be
required.
   B.   All reports shall become part of the permanent records of the
Department of Building Inspection. The Department of Building Inspection will
maintain a publicly accessible database containing façade inspection reporting
data and related information.
VI.   PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING BUILDING FACADE INSPECTION REPORTS
   A.   The owner/owner’s representative shall submit the Building Façade
Inspection Report to the Department of Building Inspection for review, either:
      1.   By e-mail: dbi.facade@sfgov.org
      2.   By mail: Department of Building Inspection, Technical Service
Division, 49 South Van Ness Ave, Suite 500, San Francisco, CA 94103
      3.   In person: Technical Services Division Key Programs Counter on the
2nd Floor of the Department of Building Inspection at 49 South Van Ness Ave,
San Francisco, CA 94103.
   B.   Once the Department of Building Inspection has completed its review of
the report, the department will issue an invoice to the owner or owner’s
representative with instructions on how to make the payment. The number of plan
review and administrative hours will be indicated on the invoice.
   C.   After all fees are paid, the property will be deemed compliant with the
program compliance deadline for which the report was submitted. An acceptance
letter may be requested by the owner or owner’s representative to confirm
compliance with the program.
VII.   NOTIFICATION AND ACTION REGARDING SIGNIFCANT DAMAGE AND UNSAFE
CONDITIONS
   A.   Either during the normal passage of time or following an earthquake,
windstorm or other cause, building facades that appear to exhibit significant
damage must be inspected within 60 days of the discovery of such damage per
SFEBC 503F.3. Immediate action is also required to address any unsafe
conditions. Significant damage includes items that have fallen from a building
or items that have cracked or dislodged to become potential falling hazards.
Determination of such significant damage shall be by a qualified professional.
   B.   If an unsafe condition is identified at any time during the façade
inspection and reporting process, the qualified professional shall immediately
notify both the property owner and the Department of Building Inspection of
such condition.
   C.   If what appears to be an unsafe condition is observed by an inspector
or a qualified professional during a post-earthquake evaluation or under any
other circumstance, such person shall immediately notify the Director of the
Department of Building Inspection of such apparent condition. The director
shall immediately arrange to have a qualified professional or other appropriate
investigator evaluate the conditions. If such condition is determined to be
unsafe, the owner shall be immediately contacted.
   D.   Immediate contact with the Department’s Building Inspection Division
shall be by telephone at 628-652-3400. Notice shall also be sent to the Façade
Unit by email to dbi.facade@sfgov.org. In case of emergencies such as
earthquakes, other notification contact methods may be established.
   E.   Upon receipt of notification from the inspector of an unsafe condition,
the property owner shall, as soon as reasonably possible, take action to
protect the public and property. Such actions may require the owner to
coordinate with various City agencies in the installation of barriers or
closure of sidewalks or streets. For such coordination in an emergency to
mitigate unsafe conditions, contact:
      1.   San Francisco Police Department – 911
      2.   Department of Public Works – Radio Room 415-695-2134
      3.   Department of Building Inspection – Building Inspections Division
628-652-3400
   F.   The owner shall, within 72 hours of notification of an unsafe
condition, provide a mitigation plan and schedule of implementation to the
Department of Building Inspection at dbi.facade@sfgov.org. The plan and
schedule shall be prepared by a qualified professional engineer or architect,
for the installation of protective barriers, stabilization, repair or other
actions to provide temporary or long-term mitigation of all imminent hazard
conditions. The mitigation plan, which shall include photographs, shall be
reviewed and approved by the Director of the Department of Building Inspection.
Work shall be completed within a time frame acceptable to the director but
shall not exceed five days. Requests for extensions may be requested and
approved on a case-by-case basis.
   G.   A Notice of Violation may be issued where (1) a mitigation plan is not
submitted within 72-hours of reporting, and/or (2) stabilization does not occur
within the agreed upon time frame in the mitigation plan. For buildings
classified by SF Planning as Category A – Historic Resource Present (including
Article 10 and 11 buildings), any elements removed as part of stabilizing the
façade for safety shall be preserved.
   H.   Issuance of Emergency Orders, permits, or other City approval and
actions to mitigate unsafe conditions shall be done in accordance with the San
Francisco Building Code, Section
102A – Unsafe Buildings, Structures or Property, and other applicable
regulations.
   I.   If the subject property is a historic resource, SF Planning
Preservation staff shall be contacted for review and advice before the issuance
of an Emergency Order or approval of any other emergency action that might
impact the historic fabric.
   J.   The qualified professional shall notify the Department of Building
Inspection at dbi.facade@sfgov.org when unsafe conditions have been mitigated.
   K.   Notwithstanding timely reporting and mitigation of the unsafe
condition, a completed inspection report is required to be subsequently
submitted within the time frame required by SFEBC Section
503F.
VIII.   UNDERTAKING STABILIZATION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE WORK
   A.   Building permits and other City permits are required to undertake work
as required under the San Francisco Building Code and other applicable codes
and regulations. A standard building permit review and issuance process shall
be followed except when expedited permit processing is requested and authorized
under Administrative Bulletin AB-004, Priority Permit Processing Guidelines.
Repair work shall be performed in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the San Francisco Building Code.
   B.   SF Planning Preservation staff shall review and approve permit
applications for the stabilization and repair of historic resources. For
buildings that are listed as historic properties defined by SF Planning as
Category A – Historic Resource Present (including Article 10 and 11 buildings),
facade repair, stabilization and maintenance shall be performed in conformance
with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Buildings: Standards for Rehabilitation. Methods of repair, stabilization and
maintenance for historic resources shall use the least intrusive or least
invasive means feasible and shall preserve existing materials and features to
the maximum extent feasible.
Qualified historic buildings may be maintained and/or repaired using the
provisions in the California Historical Building Code regarding strength,
performance, utilization, and other properties of archaic materials, provided
that such provisions result in acceptable performance.
   C.   Contractors and workers engaged in façade maintenance shall be
experienced and skilled in façade maintenance operations. Workers shall have
training and/or on-the-job experience at least equivalent to requirements for
graduation from an apprenticeship program for this occupation as approved by
the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards of the California
Department of Industrial Relations. Alternatively, workers may be registered
apprentices working under the supervision of such trained and/or experienced
workers. Compliance with this training and experience standard shall be
verified by the owner, owner’s agent, or qualified professional representing
the owner.
IX.   ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT
The Director of the Department of Building Inspection shall implement the
procedures detailed in San Francisco Building Code Section
102A, Unsafe Buildings, Structures or Property, and related abatement actions
when any of the requirements for façade inspection, reporting, mitigation,
repair or maintenance are not met in a timely manner.
Signed by:
Patrick O’Riordan, C.B.O.,      8/26/2024
Director
Department of Building Inspection
Approved by the Building Inspection Commission on 6/21/2017 and 8/21/2024
Attachment_A:_Comprehensive_Building_Façade_Inspection_Report_Compliance
Affidavit
Attachment_B:_Supplemental_Façade_Inspection_Report_and_Compliance_Affidavit
Attachment_C:_Comprehensive_Façade_Inspection_Report_Submittal_Preparation
Checklist
Attachment_D:_Supplemental_Façade_Inspection_Report_Submittal_Preparation
Checklist
