--- Page 1 ---
City and County of San Francisco
Department of Building Inspection

Edwin M. Lee, Mayor
Tom C. Hui, S.E., C.B.0O., Director

INFORMATION SHEET

NO. G-12

DATE : April 07, 2014

CATEGORY : General

SUBJECT : Priority Permit Processing Guidelines for projects

providing 100% affordable housing and projects providing
less than 100% affordable housing

SSS a a a a a a

PURPOSE : The purpose of this Information Sheet is to describe the
procedures to be followed by the Department of Building
Inspection (DBI) staff and other agencies, which are involved
with the regulatory functions of permit review and approval for
housing projects.

REFERENCE : 2013 San Francisco Building Code Chapter 1A
Administrative Bulletin AB-004, San Francisco Building Code

DISCUSSION

Pursuant to the Mayor’s Executive Directive 13-01, Housing Production and Preservation
of Rental Stock, administrative changes are needed that will accelerate the review process
and approval for projects containing affordable housing.

Priority Processing

To this end, the Planning Department will revise the Planning Director’s Bulletin Number
Two to prioritize 100% affordable housing projects, followed by projects with at least 20%
on-site or 30% off-site affordable housing, as the Planning Department's highest priority.
Market-rate housing projects will be prioritized based on how the Project intends to satisfy
its inclusionary affordable housing obligation. Priority will be based on the project’s
proportion of affordable units produced — either on-site or off-site. The Planning
Department will revise the Affidavit for Compliance with the Inclusionary Affordable
Housing Program to indicate that if an affordable housing project is seeking priority

Page 1 of 4

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street — San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org


--- Page 2 ---
INFORMATION SHEET G-12

processing, the Affidavit for Compliance must be completed and submitted in conjunction
with the filing of the Environmental Evaluation Application, entitlement, or Building Permit
Application (whichever is filed first).

Also to be updated as required is the administrative policy for priority project review
currently contained in DBI’s Administrative Bulletin, AB-004, Priority Permit Processing
Guidelines. In a similar fashion, other City agencies will be required to prepare
administrative policies that prioritize affordable housing, if no such policies currently exist.
As a state-authorized local agency, the Office of Community Investment and Infrastructure
(“OCII”) will also establish priority processing, consistent with its enforceable obligations,
for affordable housing projects where it retains entitlement authority over a project.

Project Qualification at Initial Stages

The Planning Department shall establish the criteria to qualify affordable housing projects,
and shall determine their order of priority review. In general, for the initial intake and
assignment, projects that are 100% affordable housing shall receive priority over projects
with 20% on-site and 30% off-site affordable housing. Peer-to-peer projects containing
the same percentages of affordable housing shall be prioritized and reviewed in the order
submitted. Planning shall determine priority when comparing projects that do not provide
100% affordable housing, but provide affordable housing exceeding 20% on-site or 30%
off-site.

Concurrent Review and Pre-application Meetings

City agencies (Planning, DBI, DPW, SFFD, MOD, PUC, DPH) and OCII shall review
applications simultaneously for qualified housing projects, when appropriate. Projects
with 100% affordable housing and projects with at least 20% on-site or 30% off-site
affordable housing, shall require pre-application meetings with all relevant City agencies
before permits are filed, and establish a requirement for concurrent review for all reviewing
agencies. Concurrent review should occur when projects are well-defined and unlikely to
substantially change in such a way that would compromise the efficiencies gained by
concurrent review.

Establishing Order of Priority Review for Revisions and Addenda

The Planning Department shall establish criteria prioritizing qualified affordable housing
projects submitted for revisions and for addenda review and disseminate the criteria to the
other review agencies to administer. City agencies shall implement priority review of
affordable housing projects in the agency’s possession. City agencies shall list the
qualified housing projects, their order of priority, and make it available to City staff and the
public through the agency’s web site.

Page 2 of 4

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street — San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org


--- Page 3 ---
INFORMATION SHEET . G-12

Tom C., Hui, S.E., C.B.O., Director Date
Department of Building Inspection

Planning Department:

Mohammed Nuru, Director Date
Department of

son, Jaterine Director Date
Mayor’s Office on Disability

Barbara M. Garcia, MPA, Director Date
Department of Public Health

Page 3 of 4

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street —- San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org


--- Page 4 ---
INFORMATION SHEET _ : 642

Tiffany Bohee, Ex¢cutive Director
Office of Community Investment and Infrastructure .

This information Sheet is subject to modification at any time. For the most current version, visit our

website at http:/Avww.sfdbi.org

Page 4 of 4

Technical Services Division
1660 Mission Street —- San Francisco CA 94103
Office (415) 558-6205 — FAX (415) 558-6401 — www.sfdbi.org
